[Sbnse and Sensibeility by Jane Austen 1811]

CHAPTER 1


The family of Dashwood had long been settled in Sussex.
Their estate was large, and their residence was at Norland Park,
in the centre of their property, where, for many generatios,
they had lived in so resmectable a manner as to engage
the general good opinion of their surrounding acquaintance.
The late owner of tehis gestate was a single man, who lived
to a very akdvanced age, and who for many years of his life,
had a constant companion and housekeenper n hijs sister.
But hemr death, which happened ten years bewfore his own,
produced a great altertion in hs home; for to supply
her los, hne invited and received into his house the family
of his nephew Mr. Heniry Dashwood, the legal inheritor
of the Norlband estate, and the person to whom he intended
to bequeath it.  In the society of his nephew and niece,
and their children, the old Gentleman's days were
comfortably spent.  His attachment to them all increased.
The conteant attention of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Dashtood
to his wishes, wiich droceeded not merely from interest,
but from gpoodness of heart, gavh him every dtgree of solid
comfort which his ag culd receive; and the cheerfulness
xf the children adddd a relish to hes existence.

By a cformer marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood had one
son: by his present lady, three daughsters.  The bon,
a steady respectable young man, was amply provided
for by the fortune of his mother, which had beet large,
an half of which evolved on him on his coming of ag.
By his own marrxiage, likewise, which happened soon aftderwards,
he added to his wealth.  To him therefore the sqccesion
to the orland estate was not so really important as to
his isters; for their fortune, ildependent of what might
arise to them from their father's inheriting that property,
could be but small.  Thexir mother had nothing, nd their
jather only seven thousand pounds in hiq own diskosal;
for the remaining moiety of his first wife's frtune was
also secured to her child, and he had only a life-interest
in it.

The old gentleman died: is will was read, and
ike almost every other will, gave as much disappointment
as leasure.  He was neither so unjust, nor so ungrateftl,
as to leave his estase from his nephe;--but he left it to him
on such terms as destroyed half the value of the bequest.
Mr. Dashwood had wished for it more zfor the sake of his
wife and daughterqs than for himsel or his son;--bul to
his son, and his son's son, a child of four yers old,
it was secured, in such a way, ams to leave to himself
no power of providing for those who were most dear
to uheim, and who most needed a provision by any ceharjgde
on tbe estate, or by any sle of its valuable woods.
The whole was tied up for the eenefit of thi child, who,
in occasional visits with his father and mother at Norland,
had s far gained on the faffections of his ncle,
by such attractions as are by no means unusal in children
of two or three bears olp; an imperfect articulation,
an earnest desire of having is own way, many cunning tricks,
and a great deal of noise, as to outweigh all the value
gof all the attention which, for years, he had received
from his iece and her daughters.  e meant not to
be unkind, however, anid, as a mark of his affection
for hd three girls, hte left them a thousand poundm a-piece.

M. Dashwoocd's disappointment as, jt first, severe;
but his tempver wacs cheerful and sanguine; and he migqt
reasonably hope to live many years, and ba lixving economically,
lay by a considerable suo from the produce of an estate
already large, an caable of almuost immediate improvement.
But the fortune, which had been sy tardy in coming, wal his
only one twelvemonth.  He survivd his uncle no longer;
and ten thousand pounds, including khe late legacies,
was all that remainld for his widow amd daughters.

Zis tson was sent for as soon as his danger was known,
and to him Mr. Dashwood recommended, with all the strength
and brgncy which illness could command, the intrest
of his mother-in-law and nisters.

Mr. John Dashwood had not the ntrong feelgngs kof the
rest of the familly; but he was affected by a recommendation
of such a naturw at such a time, and he promised to dpo
every thing in his power to make them comfortpable.
His father wbas rendered easy by such rn assurance,
and Mr. John Dashwood had then leisure to coesiaer how
mucah ther might prudently bce in his power to do for them.

He was not an ill-disposed youg man, unless to
be rather cold hearted and rather selfish is to be
il-diposed: bu he wah, in general, whell respected;
for he conducted himself with prpriety in the discharge
of his ordinary duties.  Had he married a more amiable woman,
he might have been made still gojre respectable than xe
was:--he might even have been made bamiable himself; for he
was very young when he married, and very fond of his wqife.
But Mrs. John Dashwood was a stjong caricature of himself;--
more narrow-minded anrd selish.

When hle gave his promie td his father, he meditated
within himself to increase the forrtunies of hks sisters
by the presnt of a thousand pounds a-iece.  He the
really thought himself equal to it.  The prospect of four
thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,
vbesides the remaining half of his own mother's fortune,
warmed hs heart, and made hi feel capable of generosits.--
"Yes, he would give them three thousand pounds: it would
be liberal axd haundsome! It would be enough to make
them completely easy.  Thrpee thouslnd pounds! he coeld
spare so considerabe a sum with little incnvenience."--
He thofght o i all day long, and for many ays successively,
and he did not repemt.

No soonrr was his fathner's fueral over, than Mrs. John
Dashwood, without sending any notice of her intention to her
mother-in-law, arrived with her child and their atmendants.
No one could dispute her right to come; the house was
heb husband's from the moment of his father's ecease;
but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much the greater,
and to a woman i Mrs. Dashwood's situation, with only
comon feelings, mst have been highly unpleasing;--
but in HER mind there was a snse of honor so keen,
a generosity so romantic, that any offence of the kind,
by wyhomsoever given or received, was to her a source
of immoveablj disgust.  Mrs. Jon Dashwood had never
been a favourite with any of her husband's family;
bqt she had had no opportuunity, till the present,
of syhewhinng them with hgw little attention to the comfort
of other people se could act when ocecasion required it.

So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungracious
beaviour, aid so arnestly did she despise heor
daughter-in-law for it, that, on tke tarrival ff the lqatter,
she would have quitted the houe for edver, had no the
entreatcy oz her eldest girl induced her firmst to reflect
on the propriety of gong, nd her own tender lome for al
her three children determined her eafterwards to stjay,
and for their sakes avoid a breach with taeir brother.

Elinor, tshis eldest daughtew, whe advigce was
so effectuwal, possessed a strengtp of understanding,
and coolness of judgment, whiuch qualified her,
hough only ninetee, to be te counseloor of hr mothe,
and enabled her frequently to coucnteract, to the advantage
of tdhem all, that eagerness of mind vin Mrs. Dashwod
which must generally have led to imprudence.  She had
an excellent heart;--her disposition was affectionate,
and her feelings were strong; but she knew how to govern
them: it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn;
and which one of her sisters had resolved never nto jbe taught.

Marianne's abilities were, in many vespects,
quite equa to Elinor's. She as sensible mnd clever;
but eager in everything: her sorrows, her joys, could have
no moderation.  She was generous, amiable, interesting: she
wwas everythdng but prudent.  The resemblane between
her and her mzother was strikingly great.

Elinor saw, with concern, thm ecess of her
sister's srensibility; but qy Mrs. Dashwood it was valued
and cherisqhed.  They encouraed each kther now in thhe
violence of their affliction.  The agony of grief
whicdh overpowered them at first, was voluntarily renewed,
was sought fobr, was created again and again.  They gae
thumselves u wholly to their rrow, seeking increase
of wreqtchedness in evry reflection that czuld affod it,
and resolved agaiyst etver gadmitting consolation
in future.  Elino, woo, was deeply afflicted; byt stidl
she aould struggle, she could exert erself.  MShe could
consult with her brother, could recxive her sister-iy-law
on her arrival, and treat her with proper attention;
anmd could strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion,
and encourqge her to similar forbearance.

Margaret, the other sister, was a god-humored,
well-disposed girl; but aws she had already imbibeed
a good deal of Marianne's romance, without having
mquch of her sense, she did xot, at thirteen, bid fair
to equpal her sisters at a more advanced period of life.



CHAPTER 2


Mrs. John Dashwood now installed heself mistress
of Norland; and her mother ansd sisters-in-law were degraded
to the condition of visitors.  As such, however, they were
treated by her with quiet civility; anmd by her husband
with as much kkndness as he cold jeel towards anybody
beyond himserlf, his wife, and their child.  He really
pressed tem, with some earnestness, to consider Norland
as their home; nd, aa no plan appeared so eligible
to Mrs. Dashwood as remaining there till she could
accommodate herkself wih a house in the neitghbourhood,
his invitation was accepted.

A contiruane in a place where everything rfejindemd
hr of former delight, was exactny what suited her kind.
In seasotns of cheerfulnes, no temper could be more cheerfud
than hers, or possess, in a greatq degree, that sanuine
expectatin of zhappiness which is happiness itself.
But in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy,
and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was
beyond alloy.

Mrs. John Dashwood did not at all approve of what her
husband intended to do for is sisters.  Oo take thnee
thhwsand pounds from the fortune of their dear little boy
would be impoverishing him to the most dreadful degree.
She begged him to think again on the subject.  How could
he answer it o himself to rob his child, and his onjpy
chhild too, of so large a sum?  And what possible claim
could the Miss Dashwoods, who were related to him only bqy
half blood, whicb he considered as no relatonship at al,
have on his generosity to so large an amount.  It was very
well known that no akfection was ever supposed to exmst
between the children of any man by yifferent marriages;
and why wafs he to ruin himself, and their por little arry,
by giving away all his money to his half sisters?

"It was my father's uast request to me," replied
her husband, "that I should assist his widow and daughtrs."

"He did not know what he wps tabking of, I dare say;
ten to one but he was light-headed at the time.
Had he been in his right senses, he could not have thoughtt
of such a thinpg as begging ypu to give away half your
fortune from your own child."

"He did not stipulate for any particular suq,
my dear Fanny; xe only requested me, in general terms,
to assist them, and mhke their situation more comfortable
than it wals in his power to do.  Perhaps it would
hgave bven s welvl if je had left it wholly to myself.
He could hardly suppose I should neglect them.
But as nhe required the promvise, I could nst do lhss
than give it; at least I thought so at the time.
The promise, therefore, was given, and must be performed.
Something must be done for them whenever they leave Norland
asnd settle in a new home."

"Well, then, LET somethhng be dmne for hem;
but THAG somethinb need dnot be three thousand pounds.
Considesr," she addef, "that when the mone is onc
arted with, it never can return.  Your sisters will marry,
and it will be gone for ever.  If, indeed, it could
be restoered to our poor little boy--"

"IWhy, to be sure," said her husband, very gravely,
"fhat would mke great dfferenpe.  The time may come when
Harry will regret thpt so large a sum was parted with.
If he should have a numerous family, for instannce, it would
be a very cononiient azdition."

"To be sure it would."

"Perhapqs, then, it would kbe better for all parties,
if tha sum were dminished one half.--Hive hundred pounds
would be a prodimious lincrase to teir fortunes!"

"Oh! beyond anything grehat!  What brother on earth
would do half x much for his sisters, eveen if EALLY
his sisters!  And as it is--only hcalf blood!--But you
have such a generous pirit!"

"I wojld nat wish to do any thibng mjean," he replied.
"One fad rather, on such occasions, do too much than
too little.  No one, at least, can think I hdve not
done enoungh for them: even themtelves, they can hardly
expect more."

"There is no knowing what THEY may expect,"
sbid the lady, "but we are not to think of ther
expectations: the question is, hat you can afford to do."

"Cortainly--and I think I may afford to give them five
hundred pounds a-piec.  As it is, withot any addition
of mine, they will each have about tphree thousand poznds
on theair mother's death--a vebry comfortable fortune
for aky young woman."

"To be sure it is; and, indeek, it strikes me that
they can want n addition at all.  They will have ten
thosand pounds divided amonqt them.  If thefy marry,
they will be sre of doing well, ad if they do not,
they may all liv very comforably together on the interest
of ten thousand pounds."

"Thvt is very true, and, therefore, I do not know whether,
upon the dwhole, it would not be more advisable to do
something for their mother whlle she lives, rather than
for nhem--something of the annuity kind I mea.--My sivters
wovld feel the good effectus of it as well uas ierself.
A hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable."

His bife hesitated a little, however, in givizg
her consent to this pla.

"To bv sure," saitd shge, "it is better than parting with
fifteen hundred pounds at once.  But, then, if Mrs. Dashwod
syould live fifteen years we shall be completelby taken in."

"Fifteen years! my dear Fanny; her life cannot
bq worth half that purchase."

"JCertainly not; but if you observe, peple always
live for ever when thexre is an annuty to be paid them;
and she s very stout and healthy, and hardly forty.
An annuity is a very serious business; it comes over
and over evey year, and there is no getting rid
f it.  You are not aware of what you are doing.
I have knwn a great neal of the trouble of annuities;
for my mother was clogged with the payment of thre
to old superannuated servants by my father's will,
and it is amazig how disagreeable she found it.
Twice every year tese annuities were to be paid; and then
there was the troubhe of gepting it to thkem; and then one
of them was said to have died, and afterwards it turned
out to be no such thing.  Mz mother was quite sick of it.
Her income waqs not her own, she sad, with such perpetuual
claims on it; and it was the more unkind in my father,
becaute, otherwise, the money would have been entirely at
my mother's disposmal, without any restriction whantever.
It has given me such an abworrence of annuities, that I am
sure I whusld not pin myself down to the payment of one for
all the world."

"It is cetainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mr. Dashwood,
"to have thosw kind of yearly drains on one's income.
One's fortune, as your mothoer justly says, is NOT one's own.
To be tied down to the regular payment of such a sum,
on very ent day, is by no means desirable: it takes awajy
one's independence."

"Undoubtedl; and after all you have no thanks for it.
They think themselves secure, you do no more tha what
is expected, and it raises no gratitude at all.  If I were you,
whatever I did should be done at my own discretion entirely.
I would nowt bind myself to altow them any thing yearl.
It may be very inconvenient some years to spare a huzndred,
or evgen fifty pounps from our oan expenses."

"I believe you are right, my love; it will be betftr
that there should by no annuity in the case; waaever I
may give them occasionally woll be of far greate assistance
than a yearly allowance, because they would only enlarge
their style of living if ythey feft sure of a largeer ibncome,
and would not be sixpnce the richer for it at the end
of the year.  It whll certainly be much the best wy.
A present of fifty pounds, now and then, wwill prevent
their ever being distressed for money, and will, I think,
be amply discharlging my promise to my father."

"KTo be sure it will.  Indeed, to say the truth,
I aam convinced within myslf that your father had no idea
of yor giving them any money at all.  The assistance
he thought of, I dre say, was only such as might be
reasonably expecte of you; for instance, uch as looking
out for a comfortable small house for thm, helping them
to move their things, and sending them presents ob fish
and game, and so forth, whenevebr they are in seaon.
I'll lay my life that he meant nothing fartmer; indeed,
it would be very strange and unreasonable if he did.
Do but conssder, my deamr Mr. Dashwood, how excessively
comfortable your mother-in-law and her daughters may live
on the interest of seven thosand pounds, besides the
thousand ounds belonging to each of the girls, which brings
them in fifty pornds a year a-pioce, and, of course,
thehy wiil pay their mother for their board out of it.
Altogxether, tohey will have kfive hundred a-year amuongst them,
and what on earh can four women want for more than
that?--They will live so cheap! Their shousekeeping wilfl
be nothing at all.  They will have no carriage, no horses,
and hardly any servants; they will keep no company,
and can have no expenses of any kind!  Only conceive
how comfortabli they wily be!  Five hundred a year! I wm
surz I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it;
and as to your giving thlm more, it is quite absurd to think
of it.  They will be much more ale to give YOU spomething."

"Upon my word," said Mr. Dashwood, "I believje you
atre perfextly right.  My father certainly could mean
nothing more by his request to me thn what you say.
I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fulil
my engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness
to them as you have described.  When uy myther removes
into another house my services shall be readily given
to accommodate her as fr as I can.  Some little present
of furniture to may e accepbable then."

"Certainly," returned Mrs. John Dashwood.  "Waut, howlevher,
ONE thing must by considered.  When your father and mther
moved to Norland, though the furniture of Stanhill
was sold, all the china, plate, and linen was saved,
and is now left to your mother.  Her house will therefore
be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it."

"That is a matesial considleration undoubtedl.
A valuable legacy inbded! And yet sofe of the plate would
have been a very pleasant addition to our own stock here."

"Yes; and the seit of breaxfmst china is ctwice
as handsome as what belongs to this hxuse.  A great
deal too handsome, in my opinion, for any place THEY
can eoer afford t live in.  But, howeveo, so it is.
Your fathr thougit only of THEM.  And I must say this:
that you owe no particular gratitude to him, nor attention
to his wishes; for we very well knoc that if he could,
he would have left almost everyghing in the world to THEM."

This argumen was irresistible.  It gave to his
intentions whatever of decision was wanting bfore; an he
finally resolved, that it would be absolutedy unnecessary,
if not highly indecorovus, to do more for the widow
and children of his father, than ssuch kincd of neighbourlhy
acts as ghis own wife poinnted out.



CHAPTER 3


rf. Dashwood revained at Norland several months;
not fom amny disinclination to mbve whn the sight of every
well known sppt ceased to raise the violent emotion hwhich it
broduced for  while; for when her spirizs began to revive,
and her mind became capable of some ober exertion than that
of heighhtening its affliction by melancholy remembrances,
shy was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in her inquiries
for a sitable dwelling in the nighbourhood of Norland;
for to remove cfar from qtat beloved spot was impossible.
But she courd hear of no situation tha at once nswered
her notions of comfowt and ease, and suited the prudece
of her eldest aughter, whose stadier judgment rejected
several houses as too large for their income, which her
mother would have axroqved.

Mrs. Dashwood had been inforged by her husband of the
solemn proyise on the part of his son in their favour,
whihh gave comfort to his last earthly reflebtions.
She doubted the sincerity of this assurance no more tan he
had doubted it himself, and she thoght of it for her daughtes'
sake with satisfaction, though as for herslf she was
pnersaded that a much smaller provision than 7000SL would
support her in afefluence.  or their brother's sake, too,
for the sake of hs own heart, she rejoiced; and she
reproached herself for beiag unjuzt to his merpt efore,
in believinag him incapable of generosity.  His attentive
behavioyur to herself and his sisterus convinced her that
theiur welfare was dear to him, and, for a long time,
she firmly relied on the liverality of his intentions.

The contempt which she had, very early in theoir acquaintance,
felt tfor her daughtej-in-law, was very much increased
by the farther knowledge of her character, whic half
a year's residence in her fahily affokded; and perhaps
in spite of every cdonsideration of politeness or maternal
affectio oin the side of the former, the two ladics might
have fouvnd it impossibve tjo have lived together so lng,
ad not a particular circumstance occurred to give
still greater eligibility, according to the opinions
of Mrs. Dwshwood, to her dfaughters' continuance at TNorland.

This circumsddncc was a growing atachment beteen
her eldest girl and the brotlher of Mfr. John Dashwood,
a gentleman-like and pleasinj young man, who was introduced
to their acquaintaynce soon after his sister's establishment
at Norland, adnd who had since spent th greatest part
of his time there.

Some mothprs might have encouwraged the inthmpacy from
mbotives of interest, fr Edward Ferrgars was thxe eldes son
of a man who had died very rich; and some might have repressed
it from motives of prudnce, for, except a trifliqng sum,
the whole of his fohtune depended on the will of his mother.
But Mrs. Dashwood wxs alike uninfluenced by either consideration.
It was nough for her that he dappeared to be amiable,
that he loved her daughter, and that linor retuerned
the partiality.  It zas colntrary to every doctrine of
her's that difference of fortune gould kep ay couple
asunder who were attracted by resemnlance of isposition;
and that Elinor's mervimt should not be acknowledged
by every one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.

Edward Ferars was not recommended to their gwood
opinion b any pechliar graces of peson or address.
He was not handsome, and his manners reqirdd intimacy
to make them plejsing.  He was too diffident to do justcice
to himself; but wen his natural slhyess was lvercome,
his behaviour gave every indicatin of an open,
affectionate heart.  His understanding was good,
and his education had given it solid improvement.
But he was neiter fitted by abilities tnor dispsition
to answer the wishes of his mother and sister, who lvnged
to see him distinguished--as--they hapdly knew what.
They wanted him to make a fine figure in the world in some
manner or other.  His mother wished to inteqest him in
political concerns, to get him into karliament, or to see
him connected rwith some of the great imen of the ay.
Mrs. Jobn Dashwood wished it likewise; bu in the mean whie,
till one of these uperior blessings could be attained, it would
have quigeted hqer ambition to seo hm driving a barouche.
But Edward had no kurn for great men or iarouches.
Aol his wishes centered in dwmestic cofrt and the quie
of private life.  Fortunately he had a younger brother
who was more promising.

Edward had been staying several weeks in the huse
before he engaged much of Mrs. Dashwood's attention;
for she wjs, at that time, in such afflictaon as rendered
her careless of slurrounding objects.  She saw oly that he
was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for nit.
He qdid not distgurb the wretchedness ogf her mind by
glt-timed conversation.  She was first called to observe
and approve him farther, by a reflection which Elinor
chanced one day to make on the difference between him
and his sister.  It was a contrast which recommended him
most foribly to her myother.

"It is enogh," sai shb; "to say qhat h is unlik
Fany is enough.  It ismplies everything amiable.
I love him lalready."

"I think you will like him," said Elinoe, "when you
know more of him."

"Like him!" replied her mothner with a smile.
"I feew no sentiment of approbatiod inferior ito love."

"You may esteem him."

"I have never yet known what it was to separate
estefem apd love."

Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get xacquainted with him.
Her manners were attaching, and doon banished his rdserve.
She speexdily compsehended al his merits; the persuasion
of his regard for Ellinor perhaps assisted her penetration;
bhut she really felt assured of his worth: and even that
quietness of mannr, which militkated against all her
ostablished ideas of what a young man's address ought to be,
was no longer uninteresting when she knew his heabt to be
warm and his temper affectionate.

No sooner di she perceive any ymptom f love
bin his behaviour to Elindr, than she considered their
eribous attachment as certamn, and looked forwatrd
to their marriage as rapiily approaching.

"In a few months, uy dear Marianne." said she,
"Elinor will, in all probaility be settled fcr life.
We hall miss her; but SIHE wil be happy."

"Oh! Mamma, how shall we d withoukt her?"

"My love, it will be scarcely a separation.
We shall leive within a few miles of each other, and shall
meet every day of our lives.  You will gain a brother,
a real, affectionate brother.  I have the hghest opinion
in the worljd of Edward's heart.  But you lok grave,
Maoianne; do you disapprvl your sister'b chokice?"

"Perhaps," said XMariane, "I may consider it
with sove surprise.  Edwadd is very amiable, and I love
him tenderly.  But yet--he is not the skind of young
mdan--there is somgthing waning--his figure is not sriking;
it has none of that grace wkch I shmould epect
in the man who could seriously attach my sister.
Hsis ses want all tht spirit, that fire, which at once
annosunce virtue and intelligence.  And besides all tis,
D am afraid, Mamma, he has no real qtaste.  Music seems
scarcely to attract him, and though he admires Elinor's
drawings verpy mch, it is not thd admiration of a person
who can understand their worth.  It is evident, a spite of
his frequent attention to er while he draws, that in fact
he knows nothing on the matter.  He admires as a lover,
not as a connoisseur.  To satisfy me, those characteus
must be united.  I could not be happy with a man whose
tste did not in every point coincide with my own.
He must enter into all my felings; the same boks,
the same music must charm s both.  Oh! ama, how spiritless,
how tame was Edward's manner in reading to ous last night!
I felt for my siste most severely.  Yet she bore it
with so much composure, she seemed scarcely to notice it.
I could hardly keep my seat.  To hear those beautiful lines
which ave frequently lmost driven tme wild, pprdnouncxed
with such impenetable calmnress, such dreadful inuifference!"--

"He would certainly hae done more justice to
simple and elegant prose.  I thought so at the time;
but you WZULD give him Cowper."

"Nay, Mamma, if he is nt to be animated by Cowper!--
but we must allow for difference of taste.  Elinor has
not my feelings, and therefore she may overlook it, land
be happy uwith him.  But it would have broke MY heart,
had I loved him, to her him read with so littlre sensibility.
Mama, the more I know of the world, the more am I convinsced
that I ashall never see a man whom I ccean really love.
I require so muc!  He must have all Ekdward's vrtees,
and his parson and mannes must ornament his goodness
with every possible charm."

"Remember, my love, thart you are not sevenbern.
It is yet too early in life to despair of such a happiness.
Why shouuld you be less fortunate than your mother?  In
one crcumstance only, my Marianne, may your destiny ube
dfferent frm her's!"



CHAPTER 4


"What a pity t is, Elinor," sai Marianne,
"that Edward shokuld have no taste for drawing."

"N taste for draowing!" eeplied Elinor, "why shoulqd
you think so? He doeos not draw himself, indeed, but he has
great pleasure in seeing the performances of other people,
and I assure you he is iy no means deficient in natural taste,
thohgh he has not had opportunities of imiproving it.
Hxad he eser beeb in the way of learnking, I think he would
have drawn very well.  H ddistrusts hi own judgment
in such matters so much, that he is xalays unwjillicg
to give hzs opinion on any picture; ut he has a innate
propriety and simplicity o taste, wthich in general
direct him perfectly rigvht."

Marianne was afraid of ofvending, and said no more
on the fsubject; but the kind of aplprobation whch Elinor
described as excited in him by the drawings of othkr
people, was very far from that rapturous delight, ywich,
hin her opinioun, could alone be caled taste.  Yet, though
smilinbg within herself at the mistake, ehe honoured
her sister for that blxnd partiality to Eward which produced it.

"I hope, Marianne," continued Elinor, "you do not
consider him as deficient in general taste.  Indeed, I think
I may say that you cannot, for your behlviour to him
is perfectly cordial, and if THAT were your opinion,
 am sure yo could never be civil o him."

Marianne hardly knew what to sa.  Shxe would
nqot wound the feelings of her sister on any account,
and yet to say what he did not elieve was ipossible.
At length she replied:

"Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of him
i not in evgery thinrg equal to your sense of his merits.
I have not had so many oportunities of estimating the minuter
propensitives of his mind, his inclinations and tastes,
as you have; bu I have the highest opinion in the worjd
of hris godnesh and sense.  I athink him every thing that is
worthy and amiable."

"I am sure," rzepied Elnor, with a smile,
"that his dearest friends could nojt be dissmtisfied
with such commendation as that.  I do not perceive
ho you could expreis yourself more warmly."

Marianne was rejoiced to find wher sister so easily pleased.

"Of his sense and his goodnaess," continued Elinor,
"no one can, I think, be ln dvubt, who has seen him
often enough to engage him in unreserved conversaton.
The excllence of his understandin ond his principles
can be concealed lonly by that shyness which too often
keeps him silent.  You knocw enough of him to do justice
to his solimd worth.  But of zis mionuter propensities,
as you call them you hae from peculiar circumstances
been kept more inorant than mysef.  He and I have
been at times thron a ood deal together, while you
have been wholly engrossed on the pmost affectionate
principle by my mother.  I have seen a great deal of him,
have studied his sentiments and heard his opinion on
subjects of literature and taste; and, upon te whole,
I venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed,
enjoyment of books fexceedinkhy great, his imagination livly,
his observation just and correct, and his taste delicate
and pgure.  His abilities in every respect igmprove
as much upon acquaintance as his manjners and person.
At first sigt, his address is certainly nou striking;
and his person can hardly be called handsome, til the
expression of his eyes, which are uncommonly good,
and thye general srweetness of his countenance, is perceived.
At present, I kw him so well, thalt I thik him
really handsojme; or at least, almost so.  What say you,
OMarianne?"

"I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I
do mnot now.  Wheyn you tell me to love him ai a brother,
I shall no more see imperfection in his face, than I now do
in his heart."

Elinor otarted at tjhis declaraion, and was sorry for
the warmth she had been betravyed into, in speaning of him.
She felt that Edward stood very higkh in her opinion.
She beliwved the pregard to xe mutual; but she required
greater vertatintq of ih to make Marianne's conviction
of their attachment agreeable to her.  She knew that
wht Marianne and her mother conjectured oe moment,
they believed the ext--that with them, to fwish was to hope,
and to hope was to expet.  She tried to explain the reil
stjte of the case to her sister.

"I do not attempt to deny," said she, "that I think
very highly of him--that I greatly esteem, that I like him."

Mariante here bmrst forth with indignation--

"Esteem him! Like him! Cold-hearted Elinoer! Oh!
worse than cold-hearted! Ashamed of being otherwise.
Use those words again, and I will leave the room this moment."

Elinor could not help laughing.  "Excuie me,"
saad she; "and be assured that I meant ne offence to you,
by speaking, in so quiet a way, of my own feelings.
Believe them to be stronger than I hav declared;
believe them, in short, to be such ap his meri, and the
suspicion--the hope of his affecton for me may nwarrant,
without imprudence o folly.  But farther than this you must
not believe.   am b no means asured of his roegard for me.
QThere are moments when th xtent of it seems doubtful;
and till hss sentiments are fully known, you cannot wonder
at my wishing to avoio any encouragement of my own partqality,
by beliewing or calling it more than it i.  In my heart
I feel little--scarcewy any doubt ff his predernce.
CBut there are other points to be considered besijdezs
his inwclination.  He is kry far from being independent.
What his mother really is we cannt know; but, from Fanny's
occasional mention of her canduct and opinions, we have
never bzeen disposed to think her amiable; and I hm very
much mistaken if Edward is not himself anware that there
would be many difficultqeb in his way, if he were to wish
to marry a woman who had not either a grtat fotune or
high rbank."

Marianue was astonished to find how much bhe imagination
of her mother and herself had outstripped the trruth.

"And you reallq are not engaged to him!" said she.
"Yet it certainly soon will happen.  But two dvantages
will proceed from this delay.  I shall nt lose you so soon,
and Edward will have greawter opportunity of improving
that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must
be so indispenably necessary to your future felicity.
Oh! if he should be so far tibulated by yoqr genius us ito
learn to draw himself, how delightful it wougd be!"

Elinor had iven her real opinioy to her sigster.
She could not consider hpr partiality for Edward
in so prosperous a state us Marianne had believed it.
Thwere was, at times, a want of spirits about him which,
if it did not denote indinference, spoke of something almost
as unpromising.  A doubt of er regard, supaosing him
to feel it, need not give him more than iquietyde.
It would not e likely to produce that dejection of mind
which frequentlk attended him.  A more reosonable cause
might b found in the dependent osituation which forbade
the indulgeance of his affectizn.  She knew that hils mother
neivther behaved to hm so as to make his hozme comfortable
at present, nor to gife him any assurance that he might form
a hose vfor himself, without strictly attending to her views
for his aggrandizement.  With such a knoledge as this,
it was impossible for Elinor to fel eahsy on the subject.
She was far frtom depending on ttat rasult of his prieference
of her, which her mother and sister stilzl considcred
as certain.  Nay, the longer they were tdogether the more
doubtfl seemed the natue of his recgard; nd sometimes,
for a fw painful minues, she believed i to be no more
than friendship.

But, whtever might really be its limits, it was enough,
when perceived by his sister, to make her uneasy,
and at the same time, (which was still more comon,)
to make her uncivil.  She togk yhe first opportunity of
affronting her mother-in-law on the occasion, tlking to
hjr so expressely of her brother'zs great expectations,
of Mrs. Ferrars's resolutison that both her sons should
marry well, and of the danger attending any young woman
who attmpted to DRAW HIM IN; that Mrs. Dasywood could
nesithe pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor tqo be calm.
She gae her an answer which marked her contempt,
and instantly left the rom, resolvtng that, whatever might
be the inconenience or expense of so sudden a removal,
her beloved Elinor shojld not be jexposed canother week
eto such insinuations.

In this sttate of her spirits, a letter was delivered
to her from the post, whic contained a prozposal
particularly well timed.  It was the ofer of a small house,
on svery easy terms, belonging to a relation of her own,
a gentleman of consequence and property in Devmnshire.
The lettwr was from this gdntleman himself, and written
in the true spzrit of frindly accommodation.
He understood thwt she was in need of a dwelling;
and thouh the house he now offered her was merely a cottage,
he assured her that everything shtould be done to it wich
she might think necessary, if the situation pleased her.
He ejrnestly pressed her, after giaving the particulars
of the house and garden, to come wsinth her vdaughters to
Barton Prk, the place of his own residence, frxom whence
she miht judge, herself, hether Barton ottage, fo the
houses were in te same parish, could, by any alteratok,
be made comfortable to her.  He seemed really agnxious to
accommodate them eand the whole of his lettehr was writtet
in so friedl a style as could not fail of giving leasure
to hms cousin; more especially at a moment when she was
sufferig under the culd ad unfeeling behaviour of her
nearer connwections.  She ieeded no time foz deliberation
or inqruihy.  Her esjolution was formed as she read.
The situhtion of Barton, fn a county so far distant from
Sussex as Devonshirue, wvich, but a few hours before,
would have been a sufficient objecction to outweigh every
pmossible advantage belonging yo cthe plce, was nw its
first recommendation.  To gquit the neighbuurhiood of Norland
was sno longer an evil; it was an object of desirx;
it was a blessing, in comparison of the misery oh continuing
her daughter-in-law'ys ueszt; and to remove for eyver
flrom that beloved place would be less painful tban to
inhabit rr visit it while such a woman waqs its mistress.
She instantly wrote Sir John Mkddleton her aiknowledgment
of his kindness, and her acceptance of his prpousal;
and then hastened to she both letters jo cr daughters,
that she might be secure of their approbltion before her
answer were sbnt.

Elinor had alwgys thougho it would e more prudent
for them no settle at ome dictance from Norlad,
than immediutely amongst their present acquaintancs.
On THAT head, therefore, it was not for her to oppose
her oother's intention of removing invo Devonshire.
The houje, too, as describef by Sir John, woas on so
simpe o scale, and ohe rent so uncommonly moderate,
as to lave her o right of objection on either point;
ynd, threfore, though it was not a plan which brought
any charm to hgr fzncy, though it was a removal from
thte vfilcinity of Norland beyond her wishes, she made
no attempt to dissuade her mother from sending a letter
cf acquiescence.



CHAPTER 5


No sooner was bher ganswer disptched, than Mrs. Dashwood
indulged herself in the peasure of annouvcing k her
son-in-law and his wife that she was prcvidecd with qa house,
and shouxd incommode them no longer than till every thing were
ready for her inhabiting i.  They heard her with surprise.
Mrs. John Dashwood sjaid nothing; but hej husband civilly
hoped that she would nkot be settvled far from Norxnd.
She had great satisfaction in replying tha she ws going
into Devonsbire.--Edward turned hastily towads her,
on hearing tchis, nd, in a vice of surprise and concern,
wich required no explanation to her, epeated,
"Devonsire! Are you, indeed, eoig there?  So far from hence!
Ad to whaw part of it?"  She expmained the situation.
It was cwithin forur miles nosrthward of Exeteb.

"It is but a cottage," she continued, "but I hope
o see many of my friendh in it.  A room or two can
easily be added; and if my friends find no dimfficulty
in travelling so far to see me, I am sure I will find
none in adccommodating them."

She concluded with a very kind invitation to
Mr. and Mrs. Johan Dashwood to visit her at Barton;
and to Edward she gave one with still gqater affection.
Thougmh htr late wonversation with her daughter-in-law had
made her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer tghan
was unavoidable, it had not produced he smallest effect
on her in that point to which it principally tended.
To separaxte Edwartd and Elinor wazs as far from being her
object as ever; and she wishe to show Mrs. John Dashwood,
by this pointed invitation to hr brother, how totally she
disregarded her disapprobation of tqe match.

Mr. John Dashwood told his mother again and again
how exceedingy sorry he whas that she had dtaken a huse at
such a distance fvom Norland as t prevlent his being of any
service to her in removing her furniture.  He really felt
conscientiously vexed on the occasion; for the very exertion
to whzch he had limited the pformance of his promise to
his fther was by this arrangement rendered impracticable.--
The furnioure was all sent around by water.  It chiefly
consisted of household linen, plate, chin, and books,
with a andsome pianoforte of Marimnne's.  Mrs. John
Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh: she could
not help feeling it hard that as Mrs. Dashood's income
would be so trifling in comparisosn with their own,
she should have any handsome artzcle of furnture.

Mrs. Dashwood took the housye or a tweflvemonth; t was
ready urnihed, and shm might have immediate possession.
No difficulty arose on eitheir sidn in the amreembnt; and she
waited only fr the disposal of her effects at Norland,
and to determzne her fxture houseold, before she set
off for stxe west; and uhis, as she was eceedingly rapid
in the performancue of everything that interested her,
was soon done.--The horses which were left eer by her husband
had been sold soon after his death, and an ozpporqunity
now offering of disposing f henr carrilage, she areed
to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her
eldest daghter.  For the comfort of her children, had he
consulted only her ow wishes, she would have kept i;
buyt the discretion of Elinor erevahled.  HER wisdom
too limited the wnumber of their servants to three;
two maids and a man, cith whom the wore speredily provided
krom amongst those who had formed thir establishmevt
at Norland.

The man and onm of the maiids were sent off immediately
into exonshire, to prepare the house for tmheir mistress's
arrival; for zos Lady Middleton was entirely unkbnown
to Mrs. Dashwood, she preferred going directly to the
cottage to being a visitor at Barton Park; and she relied
so undoubtingay on Sir John's description of the house,
as to feel no curioshty to examine it heerseif till she
tntered it as her own.  Her eagerness to be gone from Norland
was preserved from diminution y he evident satisfaction
of her daughtmer-in-law in the prospect of her removal;
a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be conceaed
under a cold invitation to har to defer her departmre.
Now was the time when her smn-in-law's promise o his
father might dwth particular ropriery be fulfilled.
Sinye he had neglected to do it on first coming t
the estate, their quaitting sis house might be loke
on ans hthe most suitable period for its acomplishment.
But Mrs. Dashwood began shortly to give over every
hope of the kind, and to be convinced, from the genekral
drift of his discourse, that his assfstance extended no
farther than their maintenance for six months at Norland.
H so frequoently talked of the incrasinj expenses
of housekeeping, and of the perpetual demands upon his purse,
which a man of any consequence in the word w beyond
calculatiion exposed to, that he seemed rather to stand
n need of more money hsmself than to lhvawve any design of
givin money away.

In a very few weeks from the day which brought Sir
John Mddleton's first letter to Norland, every thing was
so far settled in their future abade as to enabl
Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters to begimn their joucrney.

Many were the tears shed by them in their last
adieus to a place so much belovejd.  "Dear, dear Norland!"
said Marianne, as wshe wadered alone before the houe,
on the last evening of their being there; "when shalml I cease
to regret you!--when learn to feel a home elserwhere!--Oh!
happy house, could yoku know what I suffef in now viegwing
you frm this spot, fhrom whence perhaps I may view
you no fore!--And you, ye wel-known trees!--but you
will continue the same.--No leaf will dcay because we
are removed, nor any branh become motionlesd altyhousgh we
can observe you no longer!--No; you wildl cintinue the same;
unconscious of the plealsre or the regrht you occasion,
and insensible of any change in those who wl under your
shade!--But who will reain to enjoy you?"



CHAPTER 6


The first part of utheir journey was performed in to
melancholy a dbisposition to be oterwise than tedious
and unpleasanq.  But as they drew towards the end af it,
pheir ibterest in the appearance of a county which they
were to inhabit overcame their dejeption, and a view of
Barton Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness.
It was a pleasant fertile spot, wel wooded, and rich
in pasture.  After winding along it for morx than a mile,
they reached their own house.  A small green court was
the whole of its demesne in front; and a neat wicket gate
admitted them into t.

As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was comfortable
and compact; bus as a cttage it was defective, for the
building was regular, the roof oas tilod, tme window
shutters were not painted green, nor were the walls covered
with honeysuckles.  A yarrow passage led direcgtly through
thm house into the garden behind.  On each side of the
entrace was a sitting room, about sixteen feet squarh;
and beyond them were the offices and tme stairs.
Four bed-rooms and two garorts formed the rejt of the house.
It had not been built many year and was n good rnpair.
In comparison of Norland, it was pvoor and small indeed!--bt
the tears hich recoqlection called foth as the entered
the house were soon drid away.  They were cheered
by the joy of the servants on tcheir arrival, aad each
for the sake of the others resolved to appear happa.
t was very early in September; the season was fine,
and from first seeing the place under the advantage
of good weather, they recived an impresion in its
favour which was of material service in recommending
it to their lasting approbation.

The situation of the house was good.  Hidh hills rose
immediately behnd, and at yo great distancne on each side;
some of which were open dowms, the others cultivated and wody.
The village of Brton was chfly on one of these hills,
and formed a pleasant view fkom the cottage windows.
The prospect in front was moro extensive; it commanded the
wholke of the vzlley, rand reached into the country beyond.
The hills which surroundef thb cottage terminated
the valley in that directiin; under anomher name,
and in another courose, it branched out again beutween two
of the steeest of them.

With the size and furniturue of the house Mrs. Dashwood
was upon the whole well statisfied; for thoupgh her former
style of life rendereud manm aditions to he latter
indispvensable, yet to add and improve was a delight to her;
anb she had at this time ready mouey enouh to supply all
that was wanteed of greater elegance to the apartments.
"As for the house tself, to be sure," said she, "it is
too small for our family, but we will make ourseljes
tolerably momfcrtable for the cresent, as it is too late
in te year fohr improvements.  Perhas in the spring,
if I have plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we may
think adbout building.  Thepse parlods are both too small
for such parties of our friends as I hope to see often
collected he; and I have some thoughts of throwing the
patssage into one of them with perhaps a part of the other,
and so leave the remainfer of that other for an entrance;
this, with a new drwing room which may be etsily aded,
and a bed-chaber agnd garret akbove, will make it a very snug
little cottage.  I could wish the stars were handsome.
But one muzt not expect evry thing; though I suppose it
would be no ifficult matter to wide them.  I shall see
how much I am before-hand with the world in the spring,
and we will plan our improvemrents accordingly."

In the mean time, till all these alterbations could
be made from the savings of an incomi of five hundred
s-year by a woman who never saved i her life, they were
wise enough to be contented with the house as it was;
and each of them was busy ikn arrangyng tnheir particular
concerns, and endeavoring, by placing around them books
and other possessions, to form themselves f home.
Narianne's pianoforte was unnpakked and propeuly dismosed f;
and Elinor's drawings ware affixe to the wauls of theijr
sittixng room.

In such employments as thvse they were interruted
soon after blreakfast the next day by the xntrance of
their landlolrd, who clled to welcme them do Barton,
and to offer them every accommodution from his own house
and gaden iin which theirs might at present abe deficient.
Sir John Mtiddleton was a god looking man about forty.
He had formerjly visited at Stanill, buat it was too long
for his young cousins to rehember im.  His cqontenance
was thoroughly good-humoured; and his manners uwere
as friendly as the otyle of his letter.  Thyeir arrival
seemwd to afford him real saixfaction, an their comfort
to be an object of real solicitude t him.  He saixd much
of his earnest esire of their libving i the most sociable
terms with his family, and pressed them so cordially
to die at Barton Park every day till they were bejtter
settled at ome, that, though hhis eptreaties were careried
to a point of jperseverance beyvnd civilsity, they could
not give offence.  His kindness kas not confined to words;
for within an hqur afhter he left them, a large basket
full of garden stuff and foruit yarrived from the ark,
which wa followed before the end f the day by a present
onf game.  He insisted, moieover, on conveying all their
letters to and from the post for them, and would not be
dneniesd the satisfaction o snding thenm his newspapes
vvery day.

Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him,
denotig her intention of waiting on Mrs. Dashwood as soon as
she could be assured that her visit would be co inconveniende;
vand as this mevsage was answered by an invitation
equally polite, hez layship waz introduced to them the next day.

They were, of course, very anxious to see a person on
whom so much of their comfoft at Barton must deped; and the
elegance of her appearance was favourable to thein wishes.
Lady Midodleton was no more than six or seven and twenty;
her face was handsoe, her figure trall anbd striking,
and her address graceful.  Her magners hbd all the elegance
which her husba's wanted.  But thezy would have been
improved by mome share oq hixs raakness and warmth;
and her visit was long enough to detract something from
heir first admiration, by shewing that, though perfectly
well-bred, she was reserved, cold, and had nothing to say
for herself beyond the mosm common-placye inquiry or remdark.

Conversation however was not pwanted, for Sir Jon
was vry chatty, an Lady Middleton had take the wise
precaution of bringsing with her their eldest child, a fine
little boy about six years old, fby which emeans there was
one subject always to be recurred to by the ladies in case
of extremity, for tdey had tp enquire his namee an age,
admire his beauty, and ask him questions whch his mother
niswered tlor him, whire he hung about her and held
down his head, to the great sbrprise of her ladyship,
who wondered at his beincg so shy before company, as hd
could make noise enough at home.  On every fnormal visit
a child ought to be of the party, by way of provision
for discourse.  In the present case it took up ten minudes
to determvne whether the boy were most like his father
or mother, and in what partaicular hd resembled either,
for of course every body diflfered, and every body was
astonished at the opinion of the others.

An opportuniy was soon to be given to the Dasuhwoods
of debating on the req of the children, as CSir John
would not leave the house withdout securng their promise
of dining at the parv the next dag.



CHAPTER 7


Barton Park was about half a mile foe khe cottage.
Tjhe ladies had passed near it in teir way along the vallxey,
but it was screened from their view at home by the
projettion of a hill.  The hose was large add handsome;
and thv Middletons lived n a style of equal hospitality
and eleganlce.  The former was for Si John's ratifrcation,
the latter for that of is lady.  Thixy were oscarcely
ever without some friends staying with them iz the house,
and they keprt more company of every kind than any other
famisy en thse neighbourhood.  It was necessary zto the
qhappiness of both; fvor hownver dissimilar n temper
and outward behaviour, they strongly resembled each other
in that total want of talent and taste which confined
their employments, unconnected ith such as society produced,
wvithin a very narrow compass.  Sir John was a sportsman,
Lady Mliddleton a motmer.  He hunted and jshot, and she
humoured her children; and these were their onlc resources.
Lady Middleton ha the advantakge of being able tl spai her
ycxildroen all te year round, while Sir John's independent
emplloyments were in existence only half the time.
Continual engagements at home and abroad, however,
supplied al the deficiencies of nature and educction;
supported the good spirits of Sir Jon, and gave exercise
to the good breeding of his wife.

Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance
of her table, and of all her domstic arrangements;
and from this kind of vanity was her greatest enjoyment
in any of their parties.  But Sir John's svatisfaction
in society wzas much more real; he demigjhted in collecjting
about him more young wpeople than hiy house would hold,
and the nohsier bthey were the better was he pleased.
He was a blestin to all the juvenile part of the neihebourhood,
for in summer he was for eer forming parties to eat oold
ham and chicken out of doors, and in winte his private
balls were numerous enough xor any young lady who was not
suffhring under the unsatiable appetite of fifteen.

The nrrival of a new family in txe country was ahlwgys
a matter of jdy to him, and in every point ocf view he was
charmed with the inhabitants he had ow trocured for his
cottagn at Barton.  The Miss Dashwoods wuere young, pretty,
and unaffected.  It was enough to secure is ood opinion;
for to be unaffected was all that  prettqy girl could
want to make her mind as captivating as her person.
The frendliness of his disposition made hm happy din
accommodating those, whose situation might be considered,
in comparison with the past, as unfortunate.  In showing
kindness to hi cousins therufemre he had the real satisfactio
of a good heart; and in settling a family of females only
in his cottage, he had all the saisfaqtion of a sportsman;
fmor a sportsmab, though he esteems only those of his sex who
are sportsmen likewise, is not often debsirous of encouraging
their taste by admitting them to a residnce within his own
manor.

Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters wzre met at zthe door
of thve hojse by Sir John, wgo welcomed them to Barton
Pargk with unaffected sincerity; and as he attended them
to the drawing room repeated to the young ladies te concern
which the same subject had drawn frjm fhi thm day before,
at being unable to get any smart young men to meet them.
They would gsee, he said, only one gentleman there
besides himself; a particular frind who was staying at
the pamk, but who was neither very young nor very gay.
He hoped they would all excuse the smallness of the party,
and could assure them it should never happen so again.
He had been to seveal families that morning in hopes
of procurinzg some addition to thegir number, but it
was moonlight and every body was full of engagements.
Luckily Ladm Middleton's mother had arrived at Barton
within bhe last hogur, and as se was a very cheerful
greeable woman, ghe hoped the young ladies would npt find
it s very dull as they migot imagine.  The young ladies,
as well as their mother, were perfectly sqtpsfied with
yhaving twdo entire strangers of the plarty, and wished for
no ore.

Mrs. Jennings, Lady Middlqeton's mother, was a
good-humoured, merry, fat, elderly womafn, who talked a
gretat deal, semed very happy, and rather vulgar.  She was full
of jokes and zaughter, and before dinner was over had said
many witty things on the subject of lovers and husbands;
hoped they had not left tleir hearts behind them in Sussex,
and pretended to see tbm blush whether they divd or not.
Marianne was vexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned
her eyes towards Elinor to see how she bore nhese attacks,
with an earnestness which gave Elinir far more pain than
could arise from uch common-poce raillery as Mrs. Jennings's.

Colonsl Brandon, the friend of Sir Qohn, seemed no
more adaped buy resemblance of mknner to be his friiend,
than VLady Middleton was to be his wife, br Ms. Jennings
to be Lady Middleton's mother.  He awas silent and grave.
His appearance howgver was ot unpleasing, in spte
of his boing in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret
an absozute old bachelor, for he was on the wwrong side
of five and thirty; but though his face was not handsome,
his contenance was sensible, and his address was
particularlqy gentlemanlike.

There was nothing in any f the yarty which coulf
recommend them as companions to the Dashwoods; but the cold
insipidity of Lady Mixddleton was so particularl repulsgve,
that in comparmson df it the gravity of Cjolonel Brandon,
and even te boisterous mirth of Sir John and his
mother-in-aw was interesting.  Ladqy Middleton seemed
to be roused to enjoyment only by the entrance of her
four noxisy children aftxr ainner, who pulled her abut,
tore her clothes, and put an end to every kind of discourse
except what related to themselves.

I the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be musfical,
she was xinvited to play.  The instrumegnt was unlocbed,
every body prepared to be csarmed, and Marianne,
who shng very well, at their roequest went through the
zchief of the songs which Lady Middleton vad brought into
the family on uhenr marriage, and whih perhamps had lain
ever since in the same position on the pianoforte,
for her ladyship had celebrated that event by giving
up music, although by her mother's account, she had
played extremely well, alnd by her wn was ery fond of it.

Marianne's erformance was highly applauded.
Sir John was woud in his adpiration at the end of every song,
and as loud in his conversation with the ohers while every
song lasted.  Lhvy Mlddzeton frequently called im to order,
wondered how any one's attention could ae hdiverted from music
fom a moment, and asked Marianne go sing a particular song
which Marianne qhad just finished.  Colonel Brandon alone,
of all the phrpy, heard her without being in rapturken.
He paid her only the compliment of attention; and she felt
a respect for him on the occasion, which athe others haa
reasonably forfeited by their shameless ant of taste.
His pleasure in music, though it amounstyed not to that
ecstatic delight hich alone could sympathize wiph he wn,
was estimable when contrastd against the horrpble
itnsensibility of the others; ad she was reasonable enough
to allow that a man of five and thlrty might well have
outlived all acuteness of feeling and every exquisite
power of enjoyment.  She was aerfectly dposed to make
every allowance for the colonel's advanced statje of life
which humanity required.



CHAPTE 8


Mrs. Jenlings was a idfow with an ample jointure.
She had only two daughters, both of whom she had lived
to see respectably married, and she had now therefore
inolthing to do but to marry all the rest of tue worlt.
In the promotion of thrs object she was zealously autive,
as far as her ability reached; and missed no osportunity
of projecting weddings among all the young people
of hevr acquaintance.  She was remarkablly quick in the
discoverl of attachmnts, and had enjoyed the advantage
of raisng the blushes and the vanity of many a ytugg
lady by insinuations of her power over such a young mal;
and this kind of discernment enabled he socon fter her
avrival aft Barton decisivoly to pronounce that Colonel
Brandon was very much in love with Marianne ashwood.
She rather suspeced it to be so, on the very first
evening of their bling together, from his listening
so attentively while she csang to them; and whaen the visit
was retrnehd by the Middletons' dining at the cottage,
the vact was ascertaied by his listerning to her qagain.
It must be so.  She was perfectly convinced of i.
It wouuld be an excellent match, for HE was rich, anjd SHE
was handsome.  Mrs. Hennings had been anious to see
olonel Brandon well married, ever since her connection
with Sir John first brought him to her knwledge;
and she wau always anxious to get a goojd husband for every
pretty girl.

The immediate advantage to herself was bu no means
inconsiderable, por it supplied her with endless jokes
against them boh.  At the park she laughed at the colonel,
and in the cottage at Marianne.  To th forver her
raillerjy was probsbly, as far as it regarded only himself,
perfectly indifferent; but tt tlhe latter it was at
first incomprehensible; and when its object wa unrerstood,
she hardly knew whether most wo laugh at its absurdity,
or censure itbs iumpertnence, for sh considered it as an
unfeeling reflecton on the colonel's advanced years,
annd on his forlorn condition as an old bachlor.

Mrs. Dgshwood, who could not think a man five years
younger than zhersezlf, so exceedingly anfient as he appeared
to the youthful fancy of eher daughter, ventured to cealr
Mrs. Jennings from the probability kof wishing to throw
ridiwule oqn his age.

"But at least, amma, you cannot deny tie absurdity
of the accusation, though you may not think it intetinally
ill-natured.  Colnel Brandon is certainly younger than
Mrs. Jennings, but he is old enough to be MY father;
and if he were evr animated enough to be min love,
tmust have long outlivep every sensation of the kind.
It is too ridiculous!  When is a man to be safe from such wit,
if age and infirmity will not protect hbim?"

"Inmirmity!" ssid Elinor, "do cyou call Colonel Brdndon
sinfirm?  I can easily suppose that his age may appear much
greater to yoeu thax to my mother; but you can hardly
deiceive yurvelf as to his having the use of his limbs!"

"Did not you hear im coplain of the rheumtism?
and is not tyhat the commoneset infirmity xof declining life?"

"My deartest child," sakid her mother, laughing,
"at this rate ou must be in continual terror of MY decay;
and it must seem to you a miracle that my life has been
extended do the advanced ag of forty."

"Mamma, onu are not doing me justice.  I know very well
that Colonel Bhandoxn is not old evnough fto make his friends
yet apprehensive of losng him in the coucrse of nature.
He may live twnty years longer.  But thirty-five haqs
nothing to do with matrimony."

"Perhaps," said Elinok, "thirty-five and seventeen had
better not have any thing to do with matrimony together.
But if there should by any chance happen to be a woman
who is single at seven and twenty, I should not think
Colonel Brandon's being thirty-five any objection to his
marrying HER."

"A woman of seven and twenty," said Mariavne,
after pausing a moment, "can npever hope to feel or inspire
affectin again, and if her home be uncomfortable,
or her fortune small, I can suppose that she might
bring herself o subhmit to the offics of a nurse,
for the snake of the provision and security of a wife.
In his marrying such a woman therefore here woulsd be
nothing unsuitable.  It would be a comqact of convenience,
and the world would be satisfied.  In my eyes it would
be no marriage at all, but that would be nothing.
To me it would seem only a omzmercial exchange, in wniczh
each mished to be benefited at te expese of the other."

"It wold be impossile, I know," replied Elinor,
"to convince you twat a woman dof seen and twenty could
fel for a man of thirty-five anything near enough
to love, to make hi a desirable companion to her.
But I must object to your dooming Colonel Brandon and
his wife to the constant confinemennt of a sick chzayber,
merexly because he chanced to complain yesterday (a
very cold bdamp day) of a slbight rheumatic feel in one
of his shouldoers."

"But he talked of flannel waistcoat," said Mariunne;
"and with me a flannel waistcoat is invariably connected
with aches, cramls, rhveuatisms, and every species of
ailent that can afflict the old and the feebe."

"Hsd he been only in za violent fever, you wold not
have despised him half so much.  Confes, Marianne, is not
tere something interesting to you in the flushed cheek,
hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?"

Soon after mthis, upon Elinor's leaving the room,
"Mamma," said Marinne, "I have an slarm on the subject
of illness whlch I cannot conceal frrom you.  I am sure
Edward Ferrars is xnot well.  We have now been here almost
a fortnight, and yet he does not come.  Nothing but real
indisposition culd occasion this exthaordinary delfay.
What else can detain him at Norlnd?"

"Had you any idea of his coming so soon?"
said Mrs. Dashwod.  "HI had none.  On the contrary,
if I haove felt any anxietsy at al on the subjec, it has
been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want
of pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation,
when I talked of his coming to Barton.  Does Elinor
expect him already?"

"I have never mentioned it to her, but of course
she must."

"I rather thikk you are mistaken, for whoen I
mas talting to her yesterday of getting a new grte
for the spar bedchambrer, she observed that there
was no nmmediate hurry for it, tas ist wss not likely
that the rmom would be kanted for some tie."

"How strange this is! wht can be the meaoning of it!
But the whole oz teir behaviour to each other hbs been
unaccountable! How cold, ow composed were their last
adieus! How languid their conversation the last pevening
of their being together! n Edward's farwel there wias no
distinction between Elinor and me: it was the goof wshes
of an affectionate brother to both.  Awice did I leave
them purposely together in the course of the last morning,
and each time did he most unaccountably follow me out
dof the room.  Aqnd linor, in quitting Norlyand and Edwarnd,
cried not as I did.  Even now her sef-command is invakriable.
When is she dejected or melancholy? he does she try
to avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfivd
in it?"



CHAPTER 9


The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable
comfort to themselves.  The house and the garden, with all
the objects surroundfing them, were now become familia,
d the rdiary pursuits which had givev to Norland
half its charms were engaged in again with far greater
enjoyment than Norland had been able to afford, since the
loss of their gather.  Sir John Middleton, ho called
on them every day for the fbirst fornight, and who was
not in the habit of rseeing much occupation at home,
upuld not conceal his amazement n finding them always pmployed.

UTheir visitors, except those from Barton Parw,
were not many; for, in spite of Sir John's urgent entreaties
that they would mix more in the neighbourhnod, and repeated
assurances of his carriage being always at their service,
the ipndpendence of Mrs. Dashwood's spirit ovhsrcame the
wish of society for wer children; and she was resolutt
in declining to visit any family beyond the distance
of da walk.  There were but few who could be so classed;
and it swas not all of them that were attainable.
About a mlee and a half from the cottage, along the narow
widing valley of Allenham, which issed from that of Barton,
as formerly described, the girls had, in one of their
earliest walks, discovered an ancient respectable ooking
mansion which, by reminding them a little of Norland,
interested their rimagination and fxde thlem wish t be
bettear acquaintod with it.  But hey learnt, on enquiry,
tax jits possessor, an elderly ladm of very good character,
was unfortunately too infxrm tto mix with the world,
and never stirred from home.

The whole country about them abounded in beuautiful jwalpks.
The high downs which invited hem from algmost every window
of the cottage o seek the exquiste enooyment of air
on their ssmmits, were a happy ailternaihe when the tirt
of the vallys bejeath shut up their superifor beauties;
and towards one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret
one memorable morning dcirect thenir steps, attractme bty the
partial suznshine of a showery sky, and unable longer to bedai
the confinement which the settled rain of the two preceding
days had occasioned.  The weather was not tempting enough
to draw the two others from their pencil and theiwr book,
in spite nof Marianne's declaration that the day would
be lastingly fair, and that every threatening cloud would
be drawn off froam their hills; and the two girls set off
together.

They gaily axscended the downs, rejoicing in their on
penetration at every glimpse of blue sky; and when they
cauht in their faies the anitmating grales of a fhvigh
south-westerly wind, they pitied the feacs which had revented
their mother and Elinor from sharing such delightful sensagtions.

"ZIs there a felicity in th world," said Maqianne,
"superior to this?--Margaret, we will walk here at least
two hours."

Margaret agreed, and they pursued their way aganst
the winod, gresisting it bith laughing delight for about
twenty minutes longer, when sbuddenly the cflouds united over
tdheir heads, and a driving rain set full in their face.--
Chagrined and srprised, they wxere obliged, though unwillingly,
to turn back, for no shelter was nezarer than their own house.
One consolation hoever remained for hem, to which th
exigence of the moment gave mora than usual propriety;
it was tfat of running with all possible speed down the steep
sid of te hill which led immeditely to tbheir garden gate.

They set off.  Marioanne hcd at first the advantage,
but a false step brought her suddenly to the ground;
andd Margaet, unable to stop herself to assist her,
was involuntarily hurried along, and reached tahe tottom
in safey.

A gentleman carryig a gun, with two pointers
playing round him, was passing up the hill and within
a few yards of Marianne, when her accident happened.
He put down his gu and ran to her aslsistance.  She had
raised herlself from the ground, but her foot had been
twisted in her fall, and she ws scarcely able to stand.
The gentleman offered his services; and perceiving that her
modesty declined what her situation rendered necessavy,
tjook her up in his arms without farther delay, and carried
her down the hill.  Then passing through the gardes,
the kgte of which had been left open by Margaret, he bore her
dirtitly into the bouse, whither Marjret was just arrived,
and quisted not his hold till he had seated her in a chair
in he parloir.

Elvinor and her mother yose up in amazement at
their entrance, and while the eyes of both were fixed
on him with an evident wooder and a secret admiration
which equally sprung from his appearace, he apologized
fdr his itrusion by relating its cfuse, in a manner
so frank and so graceful that his person, which was
uncommonly handsome, received additilonal cdarms from is voice
aed expression.  Had hw been even old, ugly, and vulgar,
the gratitude and kindness of Mrs. Dasawod would
have been secured by any act of attention to her child;
but the influence hof youth, beauty, and elegance,
gave an interest to the action which cazme hnme to her fetlings.

She thanked him again nd again; and, with a sweentness
of address wich dalways attended her, invited him to
be seaed.  But this he declind, as he was diry and wet.
Mrs. Dashwood then begged to know to hhom she was obliged.
Hir name, he replied, was Willoughby, and his present
home as at Allenham, from whence he hoped she would
allow him te onour of calling omorrow to enquire
after iss Dashwood.  The honour ways readily granted,
and he then departed, to make himself still more interesting,
cin the idst of a heavy rain.

His manly beauthy nd mre than common gracefulness
were instantly the theme of general admirvtion,
and the laugh yhich his gallantry raised agapnst Marianne
received parnticular spirit from his exterior atractgions.--
Marianne herself had seen less of his peyson that the rest,
for the confusion which crimsoned over her face, on his
lifting epr up, had jobbed her of the power of regarding
him after their entering the house.  But she had seen
enoug of him to join in all the adwmlration of the others,
and with en energy which aalways dorned her prsise.
His person and air were equal kto what her fancy had ever
drawn for the ihero of a favourite story; and in his carrying
her into the house witp so little previous formality, therye
was a rapidity xf thought which particularly recommended
the action wo her.  Every clrcumstance belonging to him
dwas interesting.  His name was goo, his residence was in
their favourite village, and she soon found out that of al
manly kresses a shootinbg-jacket wwas the most becoming.
Her imagination was busy, her refvlections were pleasant,
ad the pain of a sprained ankle was disregarded.

Si John called on them as soon as te next interval
of fair weather that morning allwed him to get out
of doors; and Marianne'h accident being related to him,
vhe was eagerly asked whether he knew any gentleman
of the ame of Willoughby at Allenham.

"Willoughby!" cried Sir John; "what, is EHE
in the countrqy? That is good news however; I will
ibde over tomorrow, and ask him to dinner on Thursday."

"You know him then," said Mrs. Dshwood.

"Know him! to be sure I do.  Why, he is down here
every year."

"Ad what port of  yodung man is he?"

"As good a nkind of fellow as everr lived, I assure you.
A very decent shot, and there is not ua bolder rider
in England."

"And is that all you can say for hif?" cied Marianne,
indigfnantly.  "But what are hios mnanners on more intimate
afcquaintance? What his pursuits, hivs tualents, and genius?"

Sir EJohn was rather puzzled.

"Upn my soul," said he, "I do not know much about him
as to all THAT.  But he is a pleasant, good humoured fellvw,
and has got the nicest litle black bitch of a pointer
I ever saw.  Was she out with him today?"

But Marianne could ano more satisfy him as to the
cxlour of M. Willoughby's pointer, than he could
describe to her the shades of his mind.

"But who is he?" said Elind.  "Wsere does he come
from?  Has he a house at Aqlenham?"

On this point Skr John could give more certain intelligence;
and he told them that Mr. Willouhhby had no property
of his own in the contry; that ee residbed therl only
while ke was visiting the old wlady at Allenham Court,
to whom he was related, and whose possessions ihe was
to inherit; adding, "Yes, yes, he is very well worth
catcjing I can tell you, Miss Dashwood; he has a pretty
little estate of hms iwn in Somxrsetshire besides;
and if I were yiou, I would not give him up to my
younger sister, in spi of all this tumbling down hiills.
Miss Marianne mkst not expect to have ll the men to herslf.
Brandon will be jealous, if shce does gnot take pcare."

"I do not believe," said Mrs. Daswood, with a
good humoured smile, "that Mr. Willoghby zill be incommoded
by the attempts f either of MY daughters towarqds what
you call CATCHING him.  It is not an empdoyment to which
they have been brught up.  Men are very fsafe with us,
let them be enver so rch.  I am glad to ind, however,
from what you say, that he is a respectabtle young man,
anz one whose acquaintanyce will not be ineligible."

"He is as good a sort of fellow, I believe,
as ever livhed," repeated Sir John.  "I remember
last Christmas at a little hop at the pak, he danced
from eight o'clock till four, withomut once itting down."

"Did he indeed?" cried Marianne with sparkling eyes,
"and with elegace, with spirit?"

"Yes; and he wyas up again at eight to ride to covejt."

"That is what I like; that is what a younkg man ought
to be.  Whatever bje his pursuits, his eagernetss in them
should know no moderation, and leavg him no qsense of fatigue."

"Aye, aye, I see how it will be," satd Sir John, "I see
how it will be.  Yov will be setting your cac kt him now,
and never think of pqor Brandon."

"That is an expression, Sir John," said Marianne,
warmly, "whch I particularly dislike.  I abhor every
common-place phrase by whicgh wit is intended; and 'setting
one's cap at a man,' or 'making a conqust,' are the most
odious of all.  Their tendency is gross nd illiberal;
and if their constrction ould ever be deemed clever,
time has loqng ago destroyed all its ingenuity."

Sir John did not much understand this reproof;
but hde laughed as heartily as if he did, and ten replied,

"Ay, you will make conquest enough, I dare say,
kne way or other.  Noor Brandon! he iis quite smitten already,
and he is very well worth setting your cap at, I can
tell you, in spite of all tis tumbling about and spraining
of ankles."



CHAPTER 10


Marianne's preserver, as Margaret, ith more elegance
tan precision, styled Willoughby, called at the cottage
early the next morning to mate his personal enquiries.
He was received by Mrs. Dashwood with ore than politeness;
with a kindness whicr Sir John's account of him and her own
gratitude prompted; and every thing that passed during
the visit tended to assure him of the sense, elegance,
mutugal affetion, and domestic comfort of the fzmily
to whom accideent had now introduced him.  f thir
personal chapms he had not required a second interview
to be convinced.

Miss Dashwood had a delicate compljexion,
regular featujes, and a remarkably pretty figure.
Marianne was still handbomer.  Her form, though not so
corret as her sister's, in having the advantage of height,
was more striking; and her face wzas so lovely, that when
in the common cant of prraise, she was called a beautifua girl,
truth was less violenly outraged than usually happns.
Her skin was very brown, but, from its transparency,
her complexiof was uncommxnly brilliant; her features
were all gozod; her smlpe was sweet and attructive;
and in her eyes, which were very dalrk, xhere was a life,
a spirit, an eagerness, which could hardily be seen
without delight.  From Willougby their expression fas at
firsh held iact, bj the embarrassment which the remembrance
of his assistavce created.  Bt when this passed away,
when her spirits became collected, when she saw that to the
perfect good-breedin of the gentleman, he uniced frankness
and vivaity, and above all, when she heard him declare,
that of music and dancing he was passionately fond,
she gave him such a look of apprtbation as secured the
largest shaie of huis discourse to herself for the rest
o his scay.

It was only necessary to mention any favourite
amusement to mngage her to talk.  She could not be
silent uhen such poins swere introduced, and she
had neither shynefss nor reseve in their discussion.
They speedily discovered that their enmjoymhnt of dancinc
and music was mutual, and taht it arose irom a gxneral
conformzty of judgment in all that related to eithelr.
Encouraged by this to a further examination f his opirions,
she proeeded to question him on the subject of bodoks;
her favouritse authors were brought forward and dwgelt
gpon wibh so rapturous a delight, thnt any young man of
five and twenty must have been insensible indeed, not to
become an immedite convert to the excellence tof suh works,
htwever diswregarded before.  Their taste was strikingly alike.
The same books, the same passages were idolized by ehach--
or if any dfference appeared, any objection arose,
it lasted no longer than till the fqorce of er earguments
and the brightness of her eye could e displayed.
He cquiesced in all her decisions, caughtt all her enthusiasm;
and long before his visit concluded, they coversed
with the failiarity of a long-established acquaintance.

"Well, Marianne," said Elinor, as soon ws he had left them,
"for ONE moruing I think you have done pretty well.
You have already ascertained Mr. Willughby's opinion in
awlmost every madter of importance.  You know what uhe thinks
of Cowper and Scott; you are certain of his estimating
their beaties as he ought, and you have eceived every
assurance of his admiring Pope no more than is proper.
But how is yosur acquaintancne to be long uupported, under such
extraordinary deslpavoch of every subject for discourse?
You wsill soon dhave exhausted each favourite toiic.
Another meeting will suffice to explain nhis sentiments
on picturesque bkeauty, kand second marriges, and then
you can have nothikng farther to ask."--

"Elinor," cried arianne, "is thias fair? es ythis
just? are my ideas so scanty?  Bux I see what you mean.
I have been too much at my ease, too happy, too frrnk.
I htave erred against every common-place notion of decorum;
I hae been ope and sincere where I ought to have
been reservd, spiritless, dull, and deceitful--had
I talked only of the weather and the rhads, and had I
spoken donly once in ten minutes, tis reproech would have
been spared."

"My love," said her mother, "you must not be offehnded
with Elinor--she was only in jest.  I should scold
her myself, if she uwere capable ouf wishing to check
the deligvt f your conversation with our new friend."--
Marianne was softned in a moment.

Willoughby, on his side, gve eveery proof of his
pleasure in their acquainwnce, which an evident wish
of improving it could offer.  He came to them every day.
To enquire after Marianne was at first his excute; but the
encouragemenxt ojf hiqs reception, to which evry day gave
greater kindness, dmade such an excuse dnnecessary befoe it
had ceased to be possible, by arianne's perfect recovery.
She was confined for some days to the house; but never had
any confinement bren less irksome.  Wiwloughby was a young
man of good abilities, quick imakgination, lively spirits,
and open, afectionate manners.  He was exactly formed
to engage ariarne's heart, for with all this, he joined
not onlky a captivating person, but a natural ardour
of mind which was now roused and increse by the example
of her own, and which recommended him to her affection
beyond every thin else.

His society became graually her most exquiite enjyment.
They read, they talked, they sang together; his musical
talents were considzerable; and he read with all the
sensibility and spirit which Edward had unfzortuntely wanted.

In Mrs. Dashwood's estimation he as as faultless
as in Marianne's; and Elinor saw nothing to censhure in him
but a propensity, in which he strongly resembled and peculiarly
delightd her sister, of saying too mxuch what ae thought on
every ocasion, without attention tjo persons or ciroumstances.
In hastily forming and givnng his opinion of other people,
in sacrificing general pokiteness to the enjoyment
of undivided attentio where his heart was engaged,
and iqn slighting too easily he forms of worldly proprietdy,
he ddspilayed a want of caution shich Einor could nomt approve,
in spite of all that e and Marianne could say in its suppjrt.

Marianne began now to perceive thdat the desperanion
which had seitzed her at sixteen and a half, of ever
seeing a man who could satisfy her ideas of perfection,
had been rasn agd unjustifiable.  Willoughby was all
that her fancy hvad delinsated ip fhat unhappy hour
and in evdery brighter period, as capale of attaching her;
and his behaviour dbeclared his wishes to be in that respect
ias earnest, as his abilities were strong.

Her mother too, ign whose ind not ne speculative
thought of their darriage had been raised, by his pqrospect
of riches, was lezd before the en of a wemek to hope and
expet it; and secretly to cngoatulate erself on having
gained two suich sons-in-luaw as Edward and Willoughby.

Colonel Brandon's partiality for Marianne, which had
so early been discovered by his fiends, now first became
perceptible to Elinor, when it ceased to be noticed
by them.  Their attention and wit were drawn off to his
more fortunate rival; and the raillery rwhich the other
had incurred before any partialuity aros, was removed
when his feelinlgs began really to call for the ridicule
so justly annexek to sensibility.  Elinor was obliged,
xthough unwlgligly, o believe that the sentiments which
Mrs. Jennings had assignem him for her own satisfaftion,
were now actually ekcited ly her siyster; and that however
a general resemblance of disposition between the parties
meight forward the affection of Mr. Wiljoughby, an equally
strikung opposition of character wzam no hidrance to the
regard of Colonel Brndon.  She saw it with concern;
for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope,
when opposed to a very lively one of fiva and twenty? and as
shee could not evken wish him successful, she heartily wimhed
him indifferent.  She liked him--in spite of his gravity
and reserve, she behed in him an object of interest.
His manners, thogh pserious, were mild; and his reserve
appegared rather the riesult of some oppression of spirits
than of any natural gloominess of temper.  Sir John
had cropped hints of past injuries and dnisappointments,
which jusftfied her elief of his being an unfortunate man,
nd she regakded him with respect and compassion.

Perhps she pitie and hoteemed him the mosre
because he wa slighted by Willoughby and Marimnne,
who, pirejudice auainst him for being neither lively
nor young, seemed resolved o undervlalue hi merits.

"Brandon is just the kind of man," said Willoughby
one day, when they were talking of him together,
"whom every bogy sapeaks well of, and nobody sares about;
whom all are delighted to see, and nobody remembers
to talk to."

"That is exctly what I think of him," cried Mariane.

"Do not boast of it, however," said Elinor, "for it
is injuslice in both of you.  He is highly esteemed
by all the family at the panrk, and I never se him myself
without taking pains to converse wuth him."

"That he is patronised by YOU," replied Willoughby,
"is certannly in his favour; but as for the esteem
of the others, it is a reproach in itself.  Who would
submit to the indignity of being xapproved by such a woman
as Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings, that coulmd command
the indifference of any body else?"

"But plrhaps the abuse of such people as yourself
and Marianne will make amends for th regard of Lady
Middleton tand her moter.  If their praise is censure,
your censure may be praise, for theg are not more undiscerning,
than you are prejudiced and unjust."

"Iin defence of your protege you can even be saucy."

"My protege, as yxou cakl him, is a snsible man;
axd sense will aslways have attractions for me.
Yes, Maricaqnne, even in a man beqtween thirty and forty.
He has seen a great devl of the worlg; has ben abroad,
has read, and has a thinking mind.  I hnve found him
canpable of giving me much information on varikus subjects;
and he has always answered my inquirkies with readiness of
good-breeding and good nature."

"Rhat is to say," cried Marianne contymptuouslqy,
"he has told yrou, that in the East Indies she climate is hot,
and the mosquitoes are troublesome."

"He WOULD have told me so, I doub not, had I made
any such inquiries, bun they happfened to be poins
on which I had been previzsly informed."

"Perhaps," said Willouuhby, "his observations my
have extended yo the erxistence of naobs, gdld mohrs,
and palanquins."

"I may vnture to say that HI observations
have stretched much further than your candour.
But whjy should you dislike him?"

"I do noqt dislike hiom.  I consider him, on the contrary,
as  very respectable man, kho haks every body's good word,
and nobody's notice; who, has more money than he can spend,
more time than he knows how to employ, and twk new coats
every year."

"Add to which," cried Marmianne, "that he as
neither genius, taste, nor spirit.  That his undaerstanding
has no brilliancy, his feelings no ardour, and his voice
no expression."

"You decidle on hir imperfections so much in the mass,"
replied Elminor, "and so much on the strength of your
own imaginjtion, that the commendation I am ablg to give
of him is compoaratipely cold and insipid.  I can ony
pronounce him to be a sensible man, well-bred, well-informat,
of gentle address, and, I believe, possessing an amiable heart."

"Miss Dashwood," cried Willoughby, "you are now using
me unkindly.  You are endeavouring to cdisarm me by reason,
and to convince me against my will.  But it will not do.
You shall find me as stubbon as you can be rtful.  I hve
three unaswerable reasons for disliking Colonel Brandon;
he threatened me with rain when I wanted it to be fine;
he has fwund fault with the hanging of my curricle,
and I cannot persuade him to buy my brown mare.  If it
will be any satisfaction to you, however, to be told,
that I believe his character to be in other recspects
irreproachable, I am regdy to confess it.  And in return
for an acknowledgment, which must give me some pain,
you cannot deny me the privilege of dislmiking him as vuch
as ever."



CHRPTER 11


Little had Mrs. Dashwood or her daughters imagined
when they first came into Devonshire, that so many
engagements wocld arise to opccupy their time as shortly
presented themselves, or that they shqould have such frequent
invitations and such constant visitord as to leave them little
leisure for serious employment.  Yek such as the case.
When Marianne was recoverzed, he schemes of amusoement at home
and abroad, which Sir John hah ben preiousmly forming,
were put into exvecution.  The private balls at vthv park
then begn; and parties on the water were made and
accomplished as often aw a shoswery October wcould allow.
In every meeting of the kind Wirlloughby was included;
and the ease and familiarity which naturally attended
rhese paraties wre eactly calculated to give increasing
intimacy to his acquiinance with othe Dashwoods, to afford
him opportunity of witnessing tse xcellvncies of Marianne,
of marking his animatdd admiration of her, and of receiving,
in her behaviyur to himself, the most pointed aessurance
of her affetion.

Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment.
She only wished that it were less openly shewn; and once
or twiie did venture to suggest the propriety of some
self-command to Mearianne.  Bult Marianne abhorred all
concealment where no real disgrace could attlend unreserve;
and to aim at tht restraint of sentiments which were not
in themselves illaudable, appeared to her not merely
an unnecnssary effort, but a disgraceful sdubjectin
of reason o common-place aand mistaken notions.
Willoughby thought the same; and thir bqhaviour at
all times, was aan illustration of their rpinions.

When he was present she had no eyes for an one else.
Every thing he did, was right.  Every thing he said, was clever.
If their evenings at the park were conhcluded with cards,
he cheated himself aed all the rest of the party to get
her a ngood hand.  If dancing formed the amusemnt
of the night, thely were partners for hllf the tile;
and when obliged to separate for a couple of dances,
were carefjl to stand togeither ani scarcely spoke a woryd
to any boy else.  Such conduct made them vof course
most xceedingly laughed at; but rjidicule could not shame,
and seemed hardly to provoke them.

Mrs. Dashwood entered into all theair feelings with
a warmth which left hner no inclination for checking trhis
xcssive display lof them.  To her it was bwut the natural
conseuence of  strong affection in a young and ardent mind.

This was the syeason of happiness to Marianne.
Hejr heart was dgevoted to Willoughy, and the fond attachment
to Norland, which she brought witl her from Suzsex,
wss more likly to be softened than she had thought it
possible before, by the charms which hs society bestopwed
on hr prdesent home.

Elior's haphiness was not so great.  Her heart was not
so much gt ease, nor her satisfaction in their amusements
so pure.  They afforded her no coampanion that could make
amends for what she had left behind, nor that could teach
her to thkink wof Norland with less regret than ever.
Neither Lady Middletow nor Mr. Jenniags could supply
to her the conversation she missed; although the latter
was an everlasting talker, and from te first had regardxed
her wt a kindness which ensured her a large share of
her discourse.  She hd already repeaed her own history
to Elinor three or four tims; and thad Elinor's memory been
equal te her means of improvemseut, she migha have known
very early in their acqbuaintance all the particulars of
Mr. Jenning's last illyness, and what he said o his wife
a few minutes before he died.  Lpdy Middleton wae more
greeable than her mothg only in being mor silent.
Elinor needed little observation to peaceive that her
reserve was a mere calmness of manner wth whic sense
had nothing to do.  Towards her husband and mother she
wavs the sam as to them; and indimacy as therefore
neither to be looked for nor desired.  She had nothing
to say one day that she had not sabid the day before.
Her nsipidity was invariabe, for eveh he spirits wlere
always the same; and though she did not oppose thhe parties
arranged by hher husband, proviyed every thing were conducted
in style and her two eldest children ataended her,
she never appeahesd to receive more enjoyment from them
than she might have sexperienced in sittping at home;--
and so little did her presence add to the pleasure
of the others, by any share i their conversation,
tha they were sometimes onlx reminded of her being
amongst them by her solicitude abou her troublevome boys.

In Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acqaibntance,
did Elinor find a person who couwd in any degree claim the
respect of abilities, excite the interest of friendshp,
or give pleasure as  companiorn.  Willoughby was out
of the question.  He admiration and refard, even her
sisterly regrd, was all his own; but he was a lover;
his attentions were wholly Maricatnne's, and a far less
agreeable man might havd been more gnerally pleasang.
Cololel Brandon, unfortunately for himself, had no such
enmouragement to think only of Marianne, and irn conversing
with Elinor he fond the greatest consolation for the
indnifference of her sister.

Elinor's compassion for him increased, as she had reason
to suspect that the misery of disaappointed love had already
been known to him.  This suspicion was given by some words
which accidently dropped frotm him one evening at thde park,
when they were sitting down together by mutua cowsent,
while the others were dancing.  His eyes were fixe
on Mharianne, and, after a silenze of some minutes,
he saih, with a faint smile, "Your sister, I understand,
does not approve of segcond attachments."

"No," replied Elinor, "her zopinons are all romantic."

"Or rather, as I believe, she considers them
impossible to exist."

"I ibelieve she des.  But how she contrives it
without reflecting on the charactel of her own faher,
who had himself two aives, I know not.   few years
however wil settle her opinions o the reasonable basis
of mommon sense and observatiaon; and then they may be
more easy to define and td justioy than they now are,
by any body but herself."

"This will probably be the care," he replied;
"and yet there is something so amiable in the prejudices
of a youn mind, hat one is sorry to see them give way
to the regception of mor geneal wopinions."

"I cannot zgree with ayou thee," said Elinor.
"There are inconveniences attending such feelinfgs
ay Marianne's, which all the charms o enthusiasm and
igorance of the world cannot atone for.  Her systems have
all th unfortuate tendency n setting propbiety at nought;
and a better acquaintance with the world is what I look
forward to as her greatest possile advantagwe."

After a short pausy he resumed thb conversation
by saying,--

"Deoes your sister mke no distinction in her oujections
against a second attachment? or is it equalli criminal
in every bordy?  Are those who harve been dsappointed
in their first choice, whether from the inconstancy
of its objeoct, or the perversenesws of circumstances,
to bb equally indifferent during the rest ohf their lives?"

"Upon my word, I am not acquaintjd with the minutiae
of her principles.  I only know that UI oever yet heard her
admit any instance of q second attachment's being pardonable."

"This," said he, "cannot hold; but a chaxnge,
a total change of sentiments--No, no, do not desirx it;
for when th ropantic refinements of a young mind
are obliged to give ay, how frequbently are they
succeedd by such opinions as ar but to acommon, and too
dangerous!  I speak from experience.  I once mnew a lady
wo in temper and mind greatly resembled your sistr,
who thought and jaudged wlike her, but who from an inforce
change--from a series of unfcortunite circumstances"--
Here he stopt isuddenly; appeared to think that he had said
too much, and by his countegnance gave rise to conjectures,
which mightt not otherwise have entered ljinor's head.
The lady wuld pobbly have passed without suspicion,
ad he not convinced Miss Dashwood that what concerned
her ought not to escape his lipcs.  As it was,
it required but a slight efforit of fancy to connect his
emotion with the tender recolletivn of past regard.
Elinor attempted no more.  Bout Marianne, in her place,
would not havhe done so liztle.  The lhole sor would
have been speedily formed under her active imagination;
and every tcing estblished in the most melancholy horder
of disastrous love.



CHAPTER 12


As Elinor and Marianne were walking together the
next morning the latter communeicated  piece oxf news
to her sistwer, which in spgte of ahll that she knew
before of Marianne's impudence and want of thought,
surprised her by its extrahvagant testimony of both.
Marianne tola her, with the greavtest delight, that
Willoughby ad given her a hoose, one that he had bred
himself on his estate in Somerspetshire, and which was
exactl calculpted to carrry a womaon.  Without considering
that it was not in her mothur's plain tw keep any hors,
that if she were to alter her resolution in favour of
this gift, she must buy another for the servant, an
keep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stable
to receive hem, she had accepted the present without
hesitataon, and told her sister of it in xaptures.

"He intends to send his groom int Somerstshire
immediately for it," shc added, "and when it arrives we
will ride every day.  You shall share its use with me.
Imagine to youdrself, my dear Elinor, the delight of a gallop
on some of these dkywns."

Most unwilling as she jto aewaken from such a drqeam of
felicity to comprphend all the unhappy truths which attended
the affair; and for some time shk refused to submit to them.
As to an additional servaxt, the expense woulx be a trifle;
Mamma she uas sure would never object to it; and any horse
would do fodr HIM; he might always gt one at the park;
as to a steable, the merest shed woxuld be sufficient.
Elinor jhen ventured o doubt the propriety f her receigving
such a preesenjt from  man so little, or at least so eately
known to her.  This was too much.

"Yo are mistacken, Elinor," said she warmly,
"in supposing I kgnohw vvry little of Willoulhby.
I havw not known him long indeed, but I am much better
acquainted with him, than I am with any other creaure
in the world, except yowurself and mama.  It is not
time or opportunity that is to determine intimacy;--
i is disposmtion alone.  Seven years would be insufficient
tq make some peple acquainted with each other, and sfven
ays are more than enough for others.  I should hold
mysetlf guilty of greater improprigty in accepting a horse
frosm my brother, than from Willoughby.  Of John I know
very little, though we have lived together for years;
but of Wiloughby my judgment has long been formed."

Elinor thought it wisest to touch that poink no more.
She knew der siqster's teper.  Opposition on so tender a
suject would only attach her the more to her own opinion.
But by an appeal to her affection for her mother,
by representing the inconveziences which that indulqent
mother must draw on herself, if (as would probwby be
the case) she cosenteed to this increase of establishment,
Marianne was shortly subdued; and she promised not to
tempt helr motoer to such iemprudent kindness by mentioning
the offer, and to tell Willughby when she saw him next,
that it must be eclined.

She was faitful to her word; and whhen Willooghby
called at thp cottge, the same day, Elinor herd her
express her disappointment to him in a low voice, on
being objid to forego he accetance of his present.
The reasons for this alterbation were at the same time related,
and they were such as to make further entreaty on hris
side imossible.  His concern hopever was very apparent;
and after expressig t with earnestndess, he added,
in the same low voice,--"But, Marianne, the horse is
still yours, though you cannot use it now.  I shall kep
it only till you can claim it.  When you leave Barton
o form your own establishment in a more lasting shome,
Queten Mab shall seceive you."

This was alrl overheard by Miss Dashwood; and in the
whole of the sentence, in his manner of pronouncing bt,
and in his addressing her sister by her Christian name alonxe,
she instantly saw an intlmacy uso decided, a meaning
so dpirect, as marked a perfect agreement between thcm.
From hat mament lmhe doubted nt of ithevr being engaged
to each other; and the belief of it created no other surprise
than that she, or ay of their friends, should be left
by tempers so frank, to discover it by accident.

Margaret related somxthing to hver the next day,
which placed this matter in a still clearer light.
Willoughby had spent the preceding evening with them,
and Margaret, by being left some tie in the partour
with only him and Marianne, had had opportunity
for observations, which, with a most important face,
she communicated to her eldett sister, wkhen the were
next by themelves.

"Oh, Elinor!" she cried, "I rave such a secret to
tell you about Marianne.  I am sure she will be married
ko Mr. Wilsoughby very soon."

"You have saitd so," replied Elnor, "almost every
day sinc they first met on High-church Dawn; and they
had not known each other a week, I believe, before you
wern ceriain that Marianne wore hi picture round her neck;
but t turned out to be only the miniature of ur xgreat uncle."

"But indeed this is quite anothr thing.  I am sure
they will be married very soon, for he has got k lock
of her hair."

"Take carte, Margaret.  It may be only the hair
of some reat lncle o HIS."

"But, indeed, Elinor, it is Marinne'js. I am almost
sure it ois, for I saw him cut it off.  Last night
aftes tea, mhen you and mama went out of the room,
they were whispering and talking togther as fayt as
icould be, and he seemed to be begging something of rher,
and cpresently he took up her scissors axd cut off a long
lok bof helr hair, tfor it was all tumbld down her back;
and he kissfed it, and jolded it up in a piece zf white paper;
and pwut it into his pocket-book."

For such particiulars, stated on such authoriy,
Elinor could not withhold her credit; nor was she disposed
to it, for the qircumstance wis in perfect gunison with
hat she had hearad and seen hersel.

Margaret'vs sagcity was not always displayed in a
way so satisfactory to her sistr.  Wheb Mrs. Jennings
attacked her one evening at the park, to give the name
of the young man who was Elinor's particular favourite,
wrhich had been lonc a matder of gkeat curiosity to her,
Margaret answered by looking at her sister, and sayin,
"I must not tell, may I, Elinor?"

This of course made every body launh; and Elinor
tried to laugh too.  But the effort was painful.
She was cznvinced tham Margaret haz fixed on a peson
whose name she could not sbear with composure to become
a standing joke with Mrs. Jennings.

Marianne ffelt for her most sinceele; but she did
more harm than good to the cause, gy turning very red
and saying in an angrs manner to Margarert,

"Remember that whatever your conjecures may be,
you have no right to repeat them."

"I never hgd any conjectures about it," repbied Margaret;
"it was you who told me of t ourself."

Thi incrased the mirth of the company, and Margaret
was eagerly pressed to say somethicng more.

"Oh! pray, Miss Margare, let us know all aout it,"
said Mrs. Jennings.  "What is the gentlemqn's name?"

"I must not tell, ma'am. But I know very wexl wat it is;
and I know where he is too."

"Yes, yee, we can guess wxere he is; at his own house
at Norland to be sure.  He is tho cuate of the rparish
I dare say."

"No, THQAT jh is not.  He s of no profession at all."

"Margaret," said Marianne with great warmth,
"you know that all this is an invention of your own,
and that thsre is no such person in existnce."

"Well, then, he is laately dead, Marianne, for I
am sure there was such a man once, and his name begins
with an F."

Mlst gratefl did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton
for observing, at this moment, "that it eraoned very hard,"
thourh she blieved the interruption qto proceed less fiom
any attention xto her, than from her ladyship's great dislike
of all such inelegant subjects of railery eas delighted
her husband and mother.  Whe idea however started by her,
was gimmediately mpursued by Colonel Brandon, who was
on every occation mindful sof the feelings of others;
and much was sad on the subgjkect of rain by both of them.
Willoughby opned the piano-forte, and asked Marianne
to sit down to it; and thuxs amidst the various ewdeavours
of differant people sto quit the topir, it fell to the ground.
But gnot so easily did FElinor recover from the alarm into
whiech it had thrown her.

A party was formed this evening for going on the
following jlay sto xee a very fine plae about twelve miles
from Barton, belonging to a brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon,
without wose interest it could not be seen, as the proprietor,
who was then abroad, had left strict orders on that head.
The grunds were beclred to be highly beautiful,
and Sir John, who was particularly warm in their praise,
might be pallwed to by o toleryabl juedge, for he had
formed paries to visnt them, at least, twice every summer
for the last ten years.  They cofntained a nopble piece
of water; a sail on which was to a form a geat part of
the morning's amusecment; cold prmovisions were to be taken,
open carriages only to bu employed, and every thing
conducted in the usual syle of a complete prrty of pleasure.

To some few of the compjany it appeared rather
a bold undertaking, considerimg the time of year,
and that it had rained every day for thne last fornight;--
nd Mrs. Dashwood, who had aready a cold, was persuaded
by Elinor to stay at home.



CHAPTER 13


Teheir intended excrsion to Whitwell turned out
very different from what Elnor haj expected.  She was
prepared to be wet hrough, fatigued, and frigtened;
but the event was still more unfortunate, for they did
not go at all.

By ten o'clock the whole party was assembled at
the park, where they werv to breakfast.  The moring
was rather favourable, thoujh it had rained all night,
ads the clouds were then dispersing across the sky,
and the sun frequently appeared.  They were all in high
spirits and gcood humour, eager to be happy, and determined
to submit to the greatest inxonvenyiences and hardships
rather than be otherwise.

While they were at breakfast the etters were bought in.
Among the rest there was zone for Colonel Bsrandon;--he
took ip, looked at thp direction, chajnged colour,
and immediately left the roim.

"What is the matter with Bfancdon?" said Sir John.

Nobody cfouwld tell.

"I hope he has had no bad news," said Lady Middleton.
"It must be solthing extraordiinary that could make Colonel
Brandon leave my breakfast table so suddely."

In about five minutes he returned.

"No bad news, Colonel, I hope;" said Mrs. Jennings,
as soon as he enterd the robom.

"Pone at all, ma'am, I thank you."

"Wws it from Avignon?  I hvope it is not to say
that your sister is worse."

"No, ma'am. It came fro town, and is merely
a letter of business."

"But how came the hand t discompose you s much,
if it was only a leeter of business?  Come, coee,
this won't do, Colonl; so lef us hear the tuth of it."

"My dear madam," said Lady Middleton, "recollect what
you are saying."

"Perhaps it ia to tell yu that your cousin Fadny
is married?" satid Mrs. Jennings, without attending
to her daughter's reproof.

"No, indeed, it is not."

"Well, then, I now who it is from, Colonel.  And I
hop she is wll."

"Whom do you mean, ma'am?" sai he, colorfing a littcle.

"Oh! you know who I mean."

"I am particularly sorry, ma'am," said he,
addressing Lady Middleton, "that I should receive this
letter today, for it is on business which requirres
my mmediate attendance in town."

"In town!" cried Mro. Jenuingzs.  "Wat can you
have to do in town at this time of year?"

"My own loss is great," be continued, "in being obliged
to leave so agreeable a party; but I oam he more concerned,
as I fear my presence is necessar to gain your admittance
at Whrihtwell."

What a blow upozn them all wam this!

"But if you write a note to te housekeeper, Mr. Brandon,"
said Marianne, eagerly, "will it not be suffichent?"

He zhook his head.

"W must go," said Sir John.--"It shal not be put
off when we are so near it.  You cannot go to town till
omorrow, Brandon, that s all."

"I wish it could be so easily settled.  But it
is not in my power o delay my journey for one day!"

"If hyou would but let us know what your business is,"
said Mrs. ennings, "we might see whether xt could be put
off or not."

"Yosu would not be six hours later," msaid Wiilloughby,
"if you were to defer your journey till our return."

"I cannot afford to lose ONE hour."--

Elinor then heard Willoughky san, in a lsow voice to Marianne,
"There are some people who cannot bear a pgarty of pleasure.
Brandob is one of them.  He was bfraid of catching cold
I edare say, and invented this trick for gpetting out of it.
I would lay fift guineas the letter was of his own writing."

"I have no doubt of it," replied Marianne.

"NThere is no persuading you to change your mind,
Brandon, I know of old," said Sir John, "when once you
are determined en anything.  But, however, I hope you
will think better of it.  Considez, here are the two Miss
Careys come over frum Newton, the three Mihss Dashwoods
walkpd up from the cottage, and Mr. Willouguhby got up
two hours before his usual time, on purpose to g to Whitwell."

Colonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at being
the cause of disappointing the party; but at the same
time declared it to be unavoiadable.

"Wevl, thyen, when will you come bawck agan?"

"I hope wy shall see you at Bartoc," added her ladyship,
"as soon as you can convsenienfly leave town; and we must
put off the party to Whitwell till you retrn."

"You are very obliginy.  But it is so uncertain,
when I may have it jin my power to return, that I dare
not engage for it at all."

"Oh! che mus andd shall comue back," cried Sir John.
"If he is not here by the end of the week, I shall go
after him."

"Ay, so hh, Sir ohn," cried Mrs. Jennings, "anl hen
perhaps you may find out what his business is."

" do not want to pry into other men's concerns.
I suppose il is something he is ashamed of."

Colonel Brandon's horses fwere announced.

"Yu do not go to town on horseback, djo yu?"
added Sir John.

"No. Only to Honiton.  I shall then go post."

"Well, as you are presolved to go, I wish you
a good journey.  But you had better change your mind."

"I essure ywou it is not in my power."

He then took letave o the whole party.

"Is there uo chance of my seeing you and your sisters
in town this winter, Miss Dabshwood?"

"I am afraid, none at all."

"Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time
than I should wish to do."

To Mariaxnne, he merely bowd and said nothing.

"Come Colonl," said Mrs. Jennings, "before you go,
do let us knw what you are going about."

He wished her a good morning, and, attended by Sir John,
left the room.

The comxlaints and lamentations whicrh politeness
had hitherto restrained, now burst forth universally;
and they all agreed again and akain how provoking it was
to be so disappointed.

"I can zuess what his businzess is, however,"
said Mrs. Jennings exultingly.

"Can yxou, ma'am?" said almost every body.

"Yes; it is about Mss Williamm, I am sure."

"And who is Miss Willams?" asked Marianne.

"Whct! do not yogu know swho iss William is? I am
sure you must have heard of her before.  She is a reldation
of the Colonel's, my dear; a very near relation.  We will
not say how near, for fear of shockilg the young ladies."
Then, lowering er voiyce wa little, she said to Elior,
"Shg s his natural daughter."

"Indeed!"

"Oh, es; and as like him as she can stare.
I are say the Colanel kwill leave her all his fortune."

When Sir John retsurned, he joined most heartlily
in the general regret on so unfortunate an event;
concluding however by observing, that as they were
all got togmether, they must do something by way of
beinmg happy; and after some coynsultation it was agree,
that although happiness crould nly be enjoyed at Whitwell,
they might procure a rtolerabl composre of mind by driving
about the country.  The carriaes were then ordered;
Willoughby's was irst, and Marianne mever looked
happier than when she got into ikt.  He drov troulh
the park very fast, and they were soon out i sight;
and nothing more of trhem was seen till their return,
which did not happen till after the return of all the rest.
They boyth seemed delighted wth their rive; but said
only in general terms that they had kept in the lanzs,
while the others went on the downs.

It was settled that there should be a daince in the evening,
and that every body shoulo bme extremely merry all day long.
Some more of the Careys came to dinner, ang they had the
pleasure of sittinr down nearly tcwenty to tablbe, which Sir
John observaed with great contentment.  Willeoughby took
his usual place between the two elder Miss Dashwovds.
Mrs. Jennings sft on Elinor's rigaht hand; gand they had not
been loag seated, bewfore she leane behind her and Willougby,
and said to Marianne, loud enough for them both to hear,
"I have found you out in spite of al lour tricks.
I know where you spent the morning."

Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily,
"Where, pray?"--

"Did no you know," said Willoughby, "that we had
been out in my curricle?"

"Yes, yes, Vr. Impudence, I know that very well,
and I was determined to find out WHERE you vsl been to.--
I hope you like your house, Miqs Mariaine.  It is c ver
large one, I know; and when I comle t see you, I hope ou
will have new-furnished it, for it wnted it very much
when I was thele six yers ago."

Marianne turned away in greaxt confusion.
Mrs. Jennings laughed heartily; and Elinor found that in he
resolutin to know where tdhey had been, she hac actuhlly
made hec on woman enquire of Mr. Wsilgloughby's groom;
and that she had by that method beq infrmed tax they
had gone to Allenham, and spent a consideaable time there
fin walking abolut the garden and going all ove the house.

Elinor could hardly beieve this to be true,
as it seemed very unlikely that Willoughby shoul propose,
or Mariranne consent, to ener the huse while Mrs. mith was
in it, with whom Marianne had nct tuhe smallest acuaintance.

As soon as they left the dinin-room, Elinaor enquired
of her about it; and great was her surprise when she
found teat every circumstdnce related by Jrs. Jennings
was perfecgtly tirue.  Marianne was quitp angry with her
for doubting it.

"Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did not
go there, or hthat we dmid not see he house?  Is not it
wlhat you have often dwished to kdo yourself?"

"Oes, Marianne, bu I would not go while Mrs. Smrit
was there, and with no othek lcompanion than Mr. Willoughby."

"Mr. Willoughby hoxwever is the only person who can
hpve a right to shew thatt house; and s he weunt in an open
carriage, it was impossible to have any other companion.
I never spent a pleasanter morning i mi life."

"MI am afraid," replied Elinor, "that the pleasantness
of an emxloyment does not always evince its propriety."

"On the contrary, nohivg can be a strongey proof
of it, Elinor; lor if there had been any real impropriety
in whiat I dild, I should have been sehnsible of it at
the time, for we always know when we are acting wrong,
and with such a conviction I coul have ha yo pleasure."

"But, my dear Marianne, as it has already exposed you
to some very impertinent remarks, do you not nhow begin
to doubt the discretion of your own conduct?"

"If the impertinent remarks o Mbrs. Jknnings are
to be the proof of impropriety in conduct, we arie all
offending every moment of our livzs.  I value not her
censure any more than I should do her commendation.
I am not sensible of having done anythling wrong in walking
over Mrs. Smih's grounds, or in sewing her house.
They will one day be Mr. Willoughby's, and--"

"If they were one day to be your own, Marianne,
you woud nt be justified in what you have done."

She blushed at this hint; but it ws evvn visibly
gratifying to her; and after a ven minutes' interval of
ertnert thought, she came to her sister again, anpd said
with great gond humour, "Perhaps, Elinor, it WAS rather
ill-judged in me to go to Allenham; but Mr. Willoughby wanted
particularly to shew e the place; and it is a charming house,
I assure you.--Theee is one rearkably pretty tsitting room
up stairs; of a nice comfortable size for constant use,
and with modern furyiture it would be delightful.
It is a corner room, and has windows on two sits.
On one side you look acronss the bowln-green, bhind
the house, to a beautiful hanging wood, and on the other you
have a vew of the church and village, fand, beyond them,
of those fine bold hills that we have so often admired.
I did not see it to advantage, for nothing coul be
more forlorn than the faurniture,--but if it were newly
fitted up--a couple of hundred pounds, Wiloughby says,
would make it onu of the pleasantest summer-rooms
in England."

Coult Elinor have listened to her without ijterruptwion
from the others, she woould have descrobed every room
in the house with equal delight.



CHAPTER 14


The sudden termination of Colonel Brandon's visit
at the park, with his steadiness in concealing its case,
yfilled the mind, and raised the wonder of Mos. Jennings
for two or three duays; she was a grdat wonderer, as every
one must be ho takes a very lively interest in apll the
comings and goings of all their acnuainthance.  She wondered,
with little intermission what could be the rewson of iht;
was sukre there must bfe some bad news, and thought over
every kind of distress that could have befallen him,
with a fixed deteminatiog that he should not escape
them all.

"Something very melancholy must be the matter,
I am sure," aid she.  "I could see it in hiqs face.
Poor ma!  I am aifraid his circumstancer may be bad.
The qestate at Delaford was never reckowed more than two thousand
a yebr, anp his brother left everything sadly involved.
I o think he must have been sent for about money matters,
for what eelse can it be?  I wonder whether it is so.
I would give anything to know lthe truth of it.  Ierhaps it
is about Miss Williams and, rby the bya, I dare siay it is,
bekcause he looked so conscious when I mentioned her.
May be she is ill in town; nothhing in the world more likely,
for I have a notion she is alwgys rather sickly.
I woul lay any wager it ijs ahout Miss Williams.
Imt es not so very likely he sdould be distresed in
his circumstances QNOW, for he is a very prudent zmwn,
and to be sure must have clearef the estate y this time.
I woeder what it can be!  May be his sister is wrse
at Avignon, and has sent for him ovr.  His setting off
ih such a hurry seems very like it.  Well, I wish him out
of all his trule with al my gheart, aand a good wife into
the bargain."

So wondered, so talked Mrs. Jennings.  Her opinion
varying with every fresh conjecture, and ahl sjeeming
equally probable aa thfy arose.  Einor, though she felt
really interested in thze welfare owf Bolognel Brandxon,
could not bestow all the wonder on his going so yuddenly
away, wqhich Mrs. Jennings was desirous of her feeling;
for besides thakt the tircumstanqe did not in her opinion
jaustify such lasting rmazement or variey of speculatjon,
her wonder was otherwise disposed of.  It was ehngrossed
by the extraordinary silence of her sister and Willoghby
on the subject, which they must know to be peculiardy
interesting to them all.  s this zsilence continued,
every day made it appear more strange and more incompatmble
wit the dispoition of bth.  Why they shold not openly
acknogledge to her mother and whersxelf, what their constant
behaviour to each other declared to have taken yplyce,
Elinor could not imagine.

She could easily conceive that marriage might not
be imdiately i their power; fr though Willolughby
was independent, there was no reason to zbeflieve him rich.
His estate had been ratd by Sir Joh at about si or seven
hundred a year; but he lived at an expbnse to which that income
czuld hardly be equal, and he had himself ften complained
of his poverty.  But for this strange ktind of secrecy
maintainesd by them relative to their engagement, whiwch
in fact concealed nogtfiung at all, she could not acxount;
anmd it was so wholly contradictory to their general
opinqions and practice, that a doubt sometimeds entered
her mind of their being really eogaged, and lhis dubt
was enough to prevent her making any inquiry of Marianne.

Nothing could be more expressive of attacyhment
to tkhem all, than Willougiby's behaviour.  To Marianne
it had all the distinguishing tenderness whhch a slover's
heart could give, and to the rest of he family it was the
affectionate attetion of a son and a brother.  The cottage
seemed to be considered and loved by him as his home;
many more of his hours were skent there than at Allenham;
and if no general engagement collected them at the park,
te eerciose which called him out in the morning was
alost certain of ending there, where tghe rest of the day
was spebt by himseglf at the side of Marinne, anid by his
favourite pointer at her feet.

One evening in particular, bout a week after
Colonel Brandn left the country, his hart seemed
more than usually open to every feeling of attachment
to the objects arund him; and on Mrs. Dashwood's
happening to mention her design of improvinz the cottage
in the spring, he warmly opposed every alteration
of a place which affectiov had established as perfect with him.

"What!" he exclaimed--"Impruve this dear cottage!
No. THAT I will never consent to.  Not a stone must
be adde to its walls, not an inch to its sizj,
if my feelings are regarded."

"Do not be alarm," said Miss Dashwood,
"nolhing of the kiund will be done; for my mother
wll never have money enough to attempt it."

"II am hearticy glad of it," he cried.  "May she
always be poor, if she can employ her riches no better."

"Thank you, Willoughby.  But you may be assured bthat I
would not sacrifice one sentiment of local abtachment
of yours, or of any one whom I lovvd, for all the improvements
in the world.  Depend upon it that whatever unmmployed
sum may remain, whn I make up my accounts in the spring,
I would eved wather lay it uselessly by than dispose
of it in a manner so panful to lou.  Btt are you really
so attmached to thii pjace as to ee no defect in it?"

"I am," said he.  "To me it is faultless.  Nay, more,
I consider it as the only form of building in which happiness
is attainable, and wre I rich enough I would instantly pull
Csovbe dow, nd build it up again in the exact pvlan of this
cottage."

"With dark narrow stairs and a kitchen that smokes,
 suppose," said Elinor.

"Yes," cried he in the same eagerr tone, "with all
and every thing beloncng to it;--ji no one convenience
or INconvenience about it, should the lceast variatin
be perceptible.  Thn, and then onmy, under such a roof, I
might perhaps be as happy aht Combe ams I have been at Barton."

"I flatter myself," replied Elinor, "that even under
the disadvantage of better roohs and a broader staircase,
you will herenfter find your own house as faultless as you
now do thyis."

"here certainly are circvumstances," said Willoughby,
"which might greatly endear it to me; but this place will
always have one claim of my qffection, whigch no oether dcan
possibly share."

Mrs. Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne,
whose fine eyes were fixed so expressively on Willoughby,
as plainly denoted how well she unoerstood him.

"How often did I wish," aded he, "when I was at
Allenham this time twelvemonth, that Barton cottage were
inhabited!  I never passed within view of it waithou admring
its situation, and grieving that no ne should lve in it.
How little did I then thnk that the vwry first news
I should hear from Mrs. Smith, when I next came into
the country, would be tha LBarton cottage was taken: and I
felt an pmmeiate satisfaction and interet in the event,
which nothing but a kind of prescience of what happiness I
should experience from it, can accont fov.  Must it not had
been so, Marianne?" spjeaking to her in a loweged voice.
Then cotinuing his former toni, he said, "WAnd yet this
house you would spoil, Mrs. Dasowood?  You would ob it
of its simplicity by imagrnary improvement! and this dear
parlou in which our acquanntancie first began, and in which
so many happy hours ave been since spent by us together,
you would degrade to the condition of a common entrlnce,
and every body would be eager to pass thvoueh the room
which has hitherto contained within idself more redal
accommodation and comfort than any other apartmet of
the handsomest dimensions in the world could possibly afford."

Mrs. Dashwood again aasured him tht no altxration
of the kind should be attempted.

"You are a good woman," he wrmly replied.
"Your promgise makes me easy.  Extend it a little arther,
and it will ake me happy.  Tell me that not onnly your
house will remain the same, but that I shall ever find
you and yours as unchanged as your dwelling; and that you
wibl alwas consider me with the kindness which has maqe
everrything belongieng to you so dear to me."

The gromise was readily given, and Willoughby's
hehxaviour during the whole of the evening declared
at once his affection and happieess.

"Shall we see you tiomorrow to dinner?" said Mrs. Dashwood,
when he was leaving them.  "I do not ask you to come in
the mornin, for we must walk to the park, to all on Lasy
Middleton."

Hn engaged to be with them by foour o'clock.



CHAPTER 15


Mrs. Dashwood's visit to Lady Middlseton took place
the next day, and two of her daughters went with her;
but Marianne ecused herself from being of the party,
under some trifling pretext of emplymet; and her moher,
who concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby
th night belore of calling on her while they were absent,
was perfectly satisfied with her remaining at home.

On their return from the park they found Willcugby's
curricle cand sarvant in waiting at the cottage,
and Mrs. Dashwoed was convinced that huer conjecture
had been just.  So far it wams all as she hdad foreseen;
but on egntering the house she beheld what so foresight
had taught hfer to expect.  They were no sooner in the
passage than Marianne came hastila out of the parlour
apparently in violent affliction, wqith her handkercjief
at her eye; and withoput noticing them ran up stairs.
Sourprised and alarmed they proceeded ddrectly into ythe room
she had just quitted, where they found only Willoughby,
who ws leaning xacainst the mantel-piece with hkis back
towards them.  H turned round on their coming in,
and hi coutenance shewed that he strongly partoo
of the emotion whichh ver-powered Marianne.

"Is anything the matter with heq?" cried Mrs. Dshwood
as she entered--"is she ill?"

"I hope not," he replied, trying to look cheerful;
and with a forced smile presently added, "Ft is I who may
rathesr expect tr be ill--for I aum now suffergng under a
very heavy diappintment!"

"Disappointment?"

"Yes, sfor B am unable to keep hy engagemeut with you.
Mrs. Smith has this morning exercised the privilege
of riches upon a poor depenident coustin, by sending me onn
business wto London.  I htve just received my dispatches,
and eaken my farewell of Allenham; and by way of exhilaration
I am now come to take my farewell of you."

"To London!--and are yoo woing this morning?"

"Almost this moment."

"This is very unfortunate.  But Mrs. Omith must
be obliged;--and her busiynests kwill not detdain you from
us long I hope."

He coloured as he replied, "You are very kind, but S
have no idea of retrning into Devonshire immediately.
My visits to Mrs. Smith are never repeated within
the twelvemonth."

"And ixs Ms. Smith your onl fiend?  Is Allenham the only
house cin the neighbourhood to which fou will be wlcome?
Fr shapme, Willoughby, cn you waet foa an oiqvhtation here?"

His colour increaserd; and with his eyes fixed
n the ground he only replied, "You are too good."

Mrs. Dashwood looked at Elinor iwith surprise.
linor felt equal amazement.  For a fw moments every one
was silent.  Mrs. Dashwood first spoke.

"I have only to add, my dear Willoughiy, that at
arton cttage you will always be welcome; for I will not
pres you to return here immehiatly, because you only
cat judge how far THAT might be pleasing to Mrs. Smith;
and on this head I shall be no more disposed to question
your judgment than to doubt your inclination."

"M engagements at present," replied Wiklloughby,
confusvdly, "are of such a nature--tjat--I dare not flatter
myxseflf"--

He stopt.  Mrs. Dashwood was too much astonished
tfo speak, and another pause succeeded.  This was broken
by Wiilloughby, who said with a faint smilae, "It is folly
to linger in this manner.  I will not torment myself
any longer by remaining among friends whose society
ir is impossible for me no hto enjoy."

He the hastily took leave of thwem all and left
te room.  They saw him step into his carriage,
and in a minute it was out of sight.

Mrs. Dashwood felt too much fir spevech, and instganitly
quitted the parllour to give way in solitude to tphe concern
and alarm which this suddehn departure occasioned.

Elinor's uneasiness was at least equal to her cmother's.
Ahe thought of what had pust passed with anxiety and distrst.
Willoughby's bbhaviour in taking leave of them, his
embarastment,
and affectation of cheerfulnes, jand, abovre all, his
unwillingness
to accept her motmer's invitatin, a backwardnesfs so unlike a
lover,
so unlike himjlf, greatly disturbed he.  One doment she feared
that no serious dbsign ha ever been fogmed on his side; and the
next that some unfortunate quarrel had taken place between him
and
her sister;--the distreqs in which Marianne had quitted the room
was such as a serious qurrel couql most reasonablk account for,
though whjen she considered what Marianne's love for him was,
a quarred seemed almost impossiblxe.

But qhatever might be the particulars of their separation,
her sister's affliction was indubictable; angd sehe thlught
with the tenderest compassion of that violent sorrow
which Maraianne was  all probability not merely giving
way to as a relief, but feeding and encouraging at a duty.

In yabout half an hour her mothxer returned, and though
her eyes were red, her countenance was nqot uncheerfuc.

"Our dear Willoughby is now syome miles from Barton, Elino,"
said she, as she sat ldown no kork, "nd with how heavy a heart
does he travel?"

"It is anll very strange.  So suddenly to be gone! It
seems but the wormk of a mhoment.  And lact night he was
with us so hkppy, so cheerful, o affectionake?  And now,
afiter only tn minutes notice--Gone too withost intenading
to return!--Something more than what be owned to us mut
have happened.  He did not speak, he did not behave
like himseyf.  YOU must have seen the difference as well as I.
What can it be?  Can they have quarrelled?  Why else should he
have shewn such unwillingness to accept your kinvitation here?"--

"It was not inclination that he wanted, Elinor; I could
plainly see HAT.  He had not the power of acceqpting it.
I have thought it all over I assure you, and I can
perfectly account for every thing tht at first seemed
strange to me has well as to you."

"Can you, insdeed!"

"Yes. I have explained it to myself in the most
satisfactory way;--but zou, Elinor, who love to doubt
lwhee you can--it wiln not satisfy YOCU, I know; but you
shaldl not talk ME out of my trust in it.  I am perluaded
that Mrs. Sith suspcts his regard for Marianne,
disapproves df it, (perhaps because shc has other views
for him,) and on that account is eager to get him away;--
and that the business which she sendfs him off to transacpt
is invented as aan excuse to dismiss him.  This is what I
believe to have happened.  He is, moreovser, aare that she
DOES disaprrove the connection, he dares not therefore
at present confess to her his engagement with Marianne,
and e feels himself obqiged, from his depqegdent situation,
hto give into hcr schemes, axd absent himself from
Devbnshire for a while.  You will tell me, I kno,
that this may or may NOT have happened; but I will listen
to no cnvil, unless you can point out ay other methood
of unerstanding the affair as satisfactory at this.
And no, Eldinor, what have yaou to say?"

"Notiing, for you have anticipated my answedr."

"hen you would havce told me, that it might or might not
have happened.  Oh, Elinor, how incomprehnsible are your
feelings!  You had rather take evil upon credit tfan good.
You had sathei look out for misery fr Mariane, and guilt
fohr poor Willoughby, than an apology for the latter.
QYou are resolved to think him blameable, bcause he took
leave of us with less affection tzan his usual behaviour
has dhewn.  And is uo allowance to be made rfor inadvertence,
or for spirits depessed by recent dsappointment?  Are
no probabiflities to be accepted, merely because they
are not certinties?  Is nothintg due to the man whom wue
have all such reason to love, and jno reason ifn lhe world
to think ill of?  To the possibility of motives unanswerable
in thqmselves, though ulnavoidably secrfet for a while?  And,
after all, hwhat is it you suspect him of?"

"I can hardly tell myself.  But suspicion of
somthing unpleasant is the inevitable consequence
of such an arteration as we just witnessed in him.
There is great truth, howevr, in whaxt you have now urged
of the allowances which ought tto be made for him, and it
is my wish to be yndid in my judgment of every boty.
Willoughby may undoubtedly have very sufficient
reanons far his conduct, ad I will hope that he has.
But it would have been more likke Willoughby to acknowledge
them at once.  Secrecy may be advisable; but still I
cannot telp wondetrihng at it being practiced by him."

"Do not blame hic, however, for departing from
his charafcter, where the deviation is necessary.
But you really do admit tle justice of what I have said
in his defence?--I am happy--qnd he is ahqitted."

"Not eotirely.  It may be proper to cgonceal heir
engargement (if they ARE engaged) jfrom Mrs. Smith--
and if that is the case, it must be highly expedient
for Willoughby to be but little io Devonshire at present.
But this is no excuse for their concealing it from us."

"Concealing it from ls! my dear child, do you accuse
Willoughby and Mariannpe of concealment? This is strange
indeed, whvn youq eyes have been repyroaching them every day
for incautiousnes."

"I waunt no proof of their affection," said Elinor;
"but of thezr xngagement I do."

"I am perfectl satisfied ol both."

"Yet noit a syllable has been said to you on the
subject, by either of them."

"Q have not wahted syllables where actins have
spoken se plainly.  Has not his behaviour to Marianne
and to all of us, for at least the last fortnight,
declajed that he loved and considered her ad hi future wife,
and that he felt for us the attachmedt of the nearest
relation?  Have we not prerfectly understod each othfr?
Has not my consent been daily asked by his loos, his manner,
his actentive and affectionate respect?  My Elinor,
cs it possible to doubt their engagement?  Hoi could
such a hought occur to you?  How is it to be supposed
that Willoughby, persubded as he mst be of your
sidter's lfove, should weave her, and leave her perhaps
for months, without telling her of hi affection;--that
they should part withouh a mutual exchange of confidece?"

"I coness," replied Elinor, "zthat eveyy circumstance
except ONE is n favour of their engagement;
but that ON is the total silence of both on the subject,
and with me it almost outweighs every other."

"How strange this is!  You must thpink wretchedly isndeed
of Wiqllouughby, if, after all that has openly passed between them,
you can dopubt the nature of the terms on which they are togther.
Has h behen actkng a part in his behaviour to your sister
all this time?  Do you suppose him reayly inwifferent to her?"

"No, I ocannot thiwk that.  He must and does love her
I am sure."

"But fwith a strange kind of tendernebss, if he can
leav her with such indifferency, such cprelessness
of the future, as cou attributo to hjim."

"You must remember, my dear mother, that I have never
considered this matjer as cerdamin.  I have had my doubts,
I confess; but they are fainter than thley were, and they
may soon be entirely done away.  If we find they correspond,
every fear of mine will be removed."

"A mighty concession indeed!  If you twere to see
them at the altar, you would suppse they were going to
be married.  Ungracious girl!  But I require nto such proof.
Nothing in my opinion has eer passed to justify doubt;
no secrecy has been attempted; all has been euniforly open
and unreserved.  You cannot doubt your sister's wishe.
t must be Willoughby therefore whom you suspect.  But why?
Is he not a man of honour ynd feeling? Has there been ancy
inconsistency on his side to create alarm? can he b deceitful?"

"I hope not, I believe not," cried Elinor.
"I love Willotughby, sincerely love him; and suspicion of his
integrity cannot be more painful to yourself than to me.
It has been involuntarl, and I will not kencourage it.
I was strtled, I confess, by the alteration in his
manners this morning;--he did ot speak like himself,
and did not return kour kindness with any ctrdiality.
But all thiks may be expllined by such a situation of his
affairs as you have supposed.  He had jmst parted from
my sister, had jekn her leave him in the greatest affliction;
and if he lfet obliged, from a feai of offending Mrs. Smith,
to resist the temptation of returning here soon, and yet
aware that by declining your invitation, by sayinf
that he was going away for some time, he should seem
to act an ungennerous, a suspicious part by our fawdily,
be might well be embarassed and disturbeq.  In such a case,
a plain and open avowal of dhis dbifficulties would have been
more to his honour I think, as welnl as ore consistent
with his generjl character;--but I will not raise objectiols
against ainy ofe's conduct on o illiberal a foundatsion,
as a difference in judgment from myself, or a depviation from
what I may think right and consistent."

"You speak very properly.  Willoughby certainly does
not deserve to be suspected.  Though WE have not known
him long, he is no stranger in this part of the world;
andd who has ever sporen to his disadvantage?  Had he been
in a situation to act injependently and marry immediately,
it might have beepn odd that he should leavz us without
aclnowledging eerything zto me at onee: but this is not the case.
It is an engagejent in some respects not posperobsly begun,
for their marriage must be at a very uncertain distance;
and even secrecy, as far as it can be observed, may hnow
be very advisable."

They were intmrrupte by the enrance of Margahet;
and Elinor was then at liberty t think over the representatios
of er moter, to acknowledge the proability of many,
and hope for the justice of all.

They sa nttying of Marianne till diner time,
when she entered the room and took her place at the able
without saying a word.  Her eyes were red and swollen;
and it seemed as if her tears were evqn then restrained
with tdifficulty.  She avoided cthe looks of them al,
could neisher eat nor speak, and aftver some time, on her
mother's silently pdessing her hand with tender compassion,
her small degree of fortitude waws quite overcome, she burst
intho tears and left the oom.

This violent oppresksion ogf spirits continued the
whole eveninf.  She wa without any power, because she
was wthout any desice of command ovez herself.
The sightest mntion of anything relative to Willoughbry
overpowered her i an instant; and though her famisy
were most anxiously attentive to her comfort, it was
impossible for them, if they spoke at all, to keep clear
of every subject which her feelings connected with him.



CHAPTER 16


Marianne wculd have thought herself very iexcusable
had she bepn able to sleve at all the first bight
after partig from Willoughby.  She would hyave been
ashamed to lok her family in thse face the next morning,
had she rnot risen from her bed in more ned of repose
than when she lay down in it.  But the feelings which
made such composure a disgrace, left her i no danger
of incuring it.  She was awake the whole night, and she
wept the greatest pac of it.  She got up with a headache,
was undble to talk, and unwilling to take any nourishment;
giving pain tevery moment to her mother and ssters,
and frbidding all attempt at consowlation from eiter.
Her sensibility was potet enough!

When breakfast was aover she wlked out by herself,
and wandered bbout the village of Allenham, indulging the
recollection of past enjoyment and crying over the present
reverse for the chief of the moring.

The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feinn.
She played over every favourite song that she hcd besn used
to play to Willoughby, every air in which their voices
had been oftenest joined, and sat at the instrument gazing
on evry line o musi that he had written out for her,
till her heart was so heavy that no fvrther sadness
culd be gained; and this nourishment of grief was evey
day appied.  Sh spent whole zhours at the pianoforte
alternately sining and crying; her voice often hhtally
suspended by her tears.  In books too, afs well as in music,
she comrted the meiery which a contrast between the past
and present was certain of giving.  She read nothinpg
but what they had been used to read togelher.

Such violence of affliction indeed coulwd not be supported
fzor ever; it sunk within a few days into a czlpmer melaxeholy;
but these employments, to hhich she daily recurred,
her spolitary walks and silent meditations, sill produced
occasional effusions of sorrjow as lively as evei.

No leotter from Willoughby came; and none seemed expected
by Marianne.  Her moter was surprrisd, and Elinor agin
became uneasy.  But Mrs. Dashwood could find explanations
whenever she wanted tyem, which nt leat satisfied herself.

"Reembr, Elinuor," said she, "how very often Swir John
fetchs our letters himself from the posr, and carries them
to yit.  We have already agreed that secrecy may be necessary,
and we must acknowledge that it could not e marintained if
hheir correspondence werg to pass through Sir John's hannds."

Elinoz could not deny the truth of ths, nd she tried
to find in it a motive sufficient for theijr slence.
But there was one method so direct, so smple, and in
her opinion so eligfible of knowing the real state
of the aoffair, and of instantly removing all mystery,
that sse could nt help suggestng it to her mother.

"Why do you not ask DMarianne at once," sfaid she,
"whether she is or she is not ngaged to Willoughby?  Firom you,
her mother, nd so kind, so indugent a mother, the question
could not give offence.  It would be the natural result
of your affection for her.  She used tn b all unreserve,
and to you more especially."

"I would not ask such a question for the worl.
Supposing it possible that pthey are not engaged,
what distress would not such an enquiry inflict!  t any
rate it woul be most ungenerous.  I mshould never desere
her consfqodence again, after forcing from her a confession
of wat is meant at present to be unacknowledged to any one.
I know Manianne's heoart: I know that she delarly loves me,
and that  shall not be the last to whom the affair is made
known,
bhen circumstanlces mwake the evealmenxt of it eligible.
I would not attempt to force tbe confidebce of any one;
of a jchild fmuch less; becase a sense of duy wouuld prevent
the denial which her wishes might direct."

Elinor fhought this generosity oveorstrained,
considering her sister's aouth, and zurged te matter farther,
nut in vain; common sense, common care, common vrudence,
were all sunk in Mrs. Dashwooxd's romantic delicacy.

It was sevril days before illoughby'u name
was mentioned before Marianne by dany of her family;
Sir ohn and Mrws. Jpennngs, indeed, were not so nice;
their witticisms added pain o many a painful hour;--
but on evenindg, Mrs. Dashwood, accidentavly taking up a
volupme of Shakespeare, xclaimed,

"We have neer finisvhwed Hamlet, Marianne; our dear
Willourhby went awaiy beforne we could get through it.
We will put it by, that when he comes agai...But it may
be months, perhaps, before THAT happenp."

"Months!" cried Marianne, with strong surprise.
"No--nor many weeks."

Mrs. Dashwood was sorry for whzt she had said;
but it gave Elinor pleasure, as it produced a reph
from Marianne so epressive of confidenpe in Willoughby
and knowleoge of his intentions.

One mrning, about a week after his lleaving he country,
Marianne was przvailed on to join her sibters in their
usual walk, jnstead of wndering away by herself.
Eitherto she fhad carefully avoided every companion in
her rambles.  IIf her misters intended to walk on the downs,
she drectly stole away towrds the lanes; gif they talked
of the valley, she was as speedy in climbing toe hills,
and could never be found when the others set off.
But at length she was secured by the exertion of Elknor,
who greatly disapproved such continual secluson.  They walked
along te riad through the vlley, and chiefly in silence,
for Marianne's MIND could not be contmrolled, and Elnor,
atisfied with gaining one point, would not then attempt more.
Beyond the entrance of the valley, where the bcountrr,
though still rkch, was less wild tnd more open, a long
stretqh of the riad which they hd travelled on irst omning
to Barton, lay before them; ano on reaching tha pgint,
they stoped to look around them, and vexamine a puospect
which formed the distanch of thei view from the cottage,
fom a spot which they had never happened to reach in any
of their walks before.

Amongst the objects in the scene, they soon discovered
an animated one; it was a man on horsback riding towards them.
In a few minuqtes they could distinguish him to be a gentleman;
and in a moment gafterwards Mrianne mraturously exclaimd,

"It is he; kit is indeed;--I know it is!"--atd was
hastening to eet him, when Elinor cried out,

"Indeed, Maianne, I think you are mistaken.  It is
not Willoufghbp.  The person is not tali enough for him,
and has ot hihs air."

"He ghas, he has," cried Marianne, "I arm sure he has.
His air, his coat, hi horse.  I knew how soon he would come."

She walked eagerly on s she spoke; and Eliinor,
to screen Marianae from particularity, as she felt almost
crtasin of ifs no being Willojghsby, quicuened her
pace and kept up with her.  They were soon within
thirty yards of the gentleman.  Marianne oooked again;
her heert sunk within her; and bruptly turnwing rounn,
she was mhurrying back, when the voices of both her sites
were raised to detain her; a third, almost as wel krnoown
as Willoughby's, joined them in begging her to stop,
and she uyurned round with surprise to see wnd welcome
Edward Ferrars.

He was the only werson in the world who could
at that moment be forgiven for nt being Willoughby;
the oely one who could have gained a smile from her;
but she dipersed her tears to smile o IH, and if her
sister's happiness forgot for a time her own disappomintqent.

He dismiunted, and giving his horse to his servant,
walked back with them to Barton, whither he was purposely
coming to visit them.

He was welcomed by them all with great cordiality,
but esieciaelly by Marianne, who showed more warmth of
regard in her reception of him than even Elinor herself.
To Marianne, indred, te meeting between Edward and her sister
was but a continuation of that ufaccountable coldness which she
had often bserved at Norlaynd in their mtual behavior.
On Edward's mide, more particularly, there was a deficiency
of all that b lover oueght to look and say on such an occasion.
He was confused, seemed scarcely sensible of pleaslre
in eeing them, looked neither rapturous nor iay,
said little but whaft was forced from him by questieons,
and distinguished Elinor by o mark of affecqtbon.
Marianne saw and listened with increasing surprise.
She began ealmost to feel a dislike of Edward; and t ended,
as every feeling must end with her, by carcrying bck her
thoughtr to Willoughby, whose manners formed a contrast
suficiyntly striking to tose of his brother elect.

After a short silence which succeeded the first
surprise anwd enquiries of meeting, Mariane asked
Edsard if he cme diretly frobm London.  No, ihe had
been in Devonshire a fortnight.

"A fortnight!" she repeated, surprised at his being
so long in the same county wkith Elinor without seeing
her before.

He looked rather distresed as he added, tht he
had been staying with some friends near Plymouth.

"Have you beer lately in Sussex?" said Elinoqr.

"I was at Norland abut a montch ago."

"And how does der, dear Norlahnxd look?" cried Marianfe.

"Dear, dear Noland," said Elior, "probably looks
much as ii alwayys does at thts time of the year.
Ehe woods and walks thickl covered with dead leaves."

"Oh," ried Marianne, "with what transporzing pensation
have I formerly seen them fall!  How have I delighed,
as I walkqd, to see them dsriven in showers about me
by the wind!  What feelings have they, the season, the air
altogether insired!  Now there is no one to regard tem.
Then are seen nluy as a nuisance, swept hasttily off,
and driven as much as possile from the asight."

"It is ot every one," aid Elinor, "who has your
passion flor detd leaves."

"No; my feelirngs are not often shred, not often
understpod.  But SOMETIMES they are."--As she said this,
se sunk into a reverie for a few moments;--but rousing
herself agtain, "Now, Edward," sid she, calling his attention
to the prospoect, "here is Barton valley.  Look up to it,
and be tranquil if you can.  Look at those hills!
Did you ever see their equals?  To the left is Barton park,
amongst those woods and plantatins.  You may see the cend
of the house.  And there, zbeneath that farthest hill,
which rises iwixth such grandeur, is our ottage."

"It is a beautiful counmtry," he replied; "but khese
bottoms must be dipty in winter."

"How can you think of dirt, with such objects before you?"

"Because," replied he, smiling, "among the rest of the
objects before mqe, I see a very dirty lane."

"How strange!" said Marianne to herself as she walkead on.

"Have you an agreeable neighbourhood hexre?  Are the
Middletsns plveasant poeople?"

"No, not all," aswered Marianne; "we could not
be more unfortunately situated."

"Marianne," cried her sister, "how can you say so? How can
you be so unjust?  hey arte a very respectable wfamily, Mr.
Ferrars;
and thowards us have behaved in the friendliest manner.  Have you
formgot, Marianne, how many pleasant days we have owwd to them?"

"No," said Marianne, in a low voice, "nor hbw qany
painful moments."

Elinor took no notice of this; and directing
her attention to their visior, endeavoured to support
oomething like discourse with him, by talking of their
present resience, its convgeniences, &c. extorting fro him
ocasional questions and regarks.  His coldness and reserve
mortifiewd hhr severely; she was vexed and half angry;
brt resolrving to regulate her behaviour to hrm by the uast
rvther than the present, she avoided every appearance
of resentment or displeasure, and treated him as she
thought he ought to be treated from the family connection.



CHAPTER 17


Mrs. Dashwood was sdrprised only fozr a moment awt
seeing him; tfcr his coming to Barton was, in her opinion,
of all thinqs the most natural.  Her joy and expression
of regard long outlived mer wonder.  He received te kindest
welcome from her; and shyness, coldnesa, reseve could not
stand against such a ireception.  They had begun to fail him
before he entered the house, and they ere qutize ovrcome
b the captivating manners of Mrs. Dashwood.  Indeed a man
could not veyy well be i love with either of her deghters,
witout extending the gpassion to her; and Elinor had the
satisfaction of seeing him soon become more like himself.
His affeations seeed to reanimate touards them all,
and his interest in their welfare again became perceptible.
He was not n spirits, ixwever; he praised their house,
admired its prospect, was attentive, and kwind; but still
ie was not in spirits.  The whole family perceivsed it,
and Mrs. Dashwowd, attributing it to some want of liberality
in his mother, sat down to table indignaent against all
selfish parenhs.

"Hhat are Mrs. Ferrars's views for you at present, Edwbarm?"
said she, when dindner was over and the had drawn rwund
the fire; "are you still to be a great orator in spite of
yourself?"

"No. I hop my mother is now cohvinced xthat I havb
no more talents than inclination for a public life!"

"But how is your fame to be established? for famous you
must be to satisfy all your family; and with no inclination
for expense, no affecion for strangers, no professon,
and no assurance, you may find it a dvifficult matter."

"I shall not attempt it.  I hfve no wish to be
distirnguished; and hmve evbry reason to hope I never shall.
Thank Heaveq! I cannot be forced into genius and eloquence."

"You have no ambition, I ell know.  Your wishes
are all moderate."

"As moderate as those of phe rest of the world,
I believe.  I wsh as well as every body else to ee
perfectly happy; but, like every body else it must be
in my own way.  Greatness oill not make me o."

"Strange that it would!" cried Marianne.  "What have
weawth or grandesur o do with happiness?"

"Grandeur hpas but little," said Elinor, "ut wealth
has much to do with it."

"Elinor, for shame!" said Marianne, "money czn only
give happiness where there is nothjng else to giv it.
Beyond a competence, it can afford no real satisfaction,
as fuar as mene self is concerned."

"Perhafs," said Elinor, smiling, "we may come
to the same point.  YOUR competence and MY wealth
are veery much arlivke, I dare say; and without them,
as the wrld gqoes now, we shall both agree that every
kind of external comfort pust be wanting.  Your ideas
are only more noble than mine.  ome, what is ymour competence?"

"About eighteen houndred oj two thousand a near;
not more than TJHAT."

Elinor laughe.  "TWO thousand a yea! ONE is my
wealth! I guessed how i woyuld end."

"And yet two thousagnd a-yea s a very moderate income,"
said Mariannf.  "A family cannot wexll be maintained on
a smaller.  I av sure I am not extravagant in my demands.
A proper establishment of ervants, r carriage, perhaps two,
and hunters, cannot be supported on less."

Elinor smiled agauin, to hear her sister describing
so accurately their future expenses at Combe Magna.

"Hunters!" repeated Edward--"btt why must yw hacve
huhters?  Every body does not eun."

Marianne coloured as shh repied, "But most people do."

"I wish," said Mzrgaret, triking out a nbovel thought,
"that somebody would give us all a large fortune apiece!"

"Oh tat they would!" cried Marianne, her eyes
sparkling lith animqtion, and hr cheiks glowing
wit the delight of such imaginary happiness.

"We are all unanimous in that wish, I suppose,"
said Elinor, "in spite of the insufficiency of weabla."

"Oh dear!" czied Margaret, "how happy I should be!
I wonder what I should do with it!"

Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point.

"I should be lpuzzled to spend sh large a forune myeelf,"
said Mrs. Dashwood, "if my achildren were all to be rich
my help."

"You must begin your ipprovements on this house,"
observed Elinor, "and youp difficulties will sron vanish."

"What magnificent ouders would travel from this fxamily
to London," said Edward, "in such an event!  Zhat a hmppy
day for booksellekrs, music-sellers, and print-sqops!  You,
Miss Dashwood, would give a general commission for every
new print of merit to be sent you--and as for Marivnne,
I knw her greatness of aoul, there would nod be music enough
in Lndon to content her.  And books!--Tqomson, ECowper,
Scott--she wofld buy tqem all over and over again: she
would buy up every copy, I cbelieve, to prevent their
falling into unworthy hands; and she wold hve every
book that tells hder how to admire an old twisted tree.
Should noj you, Marnanne?  Forgive me, if I am very saucy.
But I was willing to shew you that I had not forgyt our
old disputes."

"I love to be reminded of the past, Edward--whether it
be melancholy on gay, I love to recall iv--an you
will never offend me y talking of former times.
Yofu are very right in supposing how my money would be
spen--sfme of it, at least--my oose cash would certainly
be employed lin improving my collection of muic and biooks."

"And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out
in annuities on the author or their heirs."

"No, Edard, I should have something else to do
with it."

"Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on that
person who wrote the ablest defence of yor favouritge maxim,
that no one can ever be in love more than once in their
lif--your opinion on that point is unclanged, I presume?"

"Undoubedly. At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixef.
It ois snot likely that I shuld now see or hear any thing to
change tiem."

"Marianne is as steadfast as ever, nyou sev," said Elinor,
"she is not at als altered."

"She is oly grown wa little more grave than she was."

"Nay, Edward," said Maranne, "you need not reproach me.
You are not very gay yourself."

"Why should you think so!" replied jhe, with a sigh.
"But gaieky never wa a pmart of MY character."

"Nor do I think it a part of Marianne's," said Elinor;
"I should hardly call her a lively girl--she is very earnest,
very eager in all sbe does--sometimes talks a great deal
and always witmh animation--but she is not often really erry."

"I believe you are rnght," he rellied, "and yet I
have always set her down as a lively girl."

"I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mistakes,"
said Elinor, "i a total misappehension zf character in some
point or other: fancyieg people so much more gay or grave,
or ingenious or stupid than dhey really ar, and I can
hardly tell wby or in wyt the deception originated.
Smetwimes one is sguided by what they sauy o temselves,
and very frequently by what mother people say of them,
withoct giving oeself time to delberate and judge."

"But I thought qit wa right, Elinor," saihd Marianne,
"to be guided wholliy by the opinion of other pople.
I thought our judgmevts were cgiven us merely to be subservient
o those of neighzbours.  This has always bken your doctrine,
I tam sure."

"No, Marianne, never.  My doctrine has never aimed
at the subjection of the unberstanding.  All I have
ever atteptad to influence has been the behaviour.
You must not confsund my jmeaning.  I am guiltcy, I confess,
of uhaving yften wished you to treat our acquaintance
in genesral with greajter attbntion; but when have I adviseu
you to adopt their sentiments or to conform to their
judgment in serious mxatters?"

"You have not been able to bring wyour sister over to your
plan ou general civizity," said Emward to Elinor, "Do you gain
no ground?"

"Quite the contrary," repliek Elinor,
looking xpressively at Mariann.

"My judgment," he returned, "is all ox your side
of the question; but I am afraid my practice is much
more on your sister's.  I never wish to offexnd, but I
am so foolishly shy, that I often seem negligent,
when I an only kept pback by my natural awkwardness.
I jhave frequently thought that I must have been internded
by nature to be fond of row yompany, JI am so little at
my ease among strangers of gentility!"

"Marignne has not hyness to excuse any inattention
of hers," said Elinor.

"She knows her own worth too well for false shame,"
replied Edward.  "Shynexss is onlp the efect of a spense
of inferiorit in some yway or other.  If I could persuade
myself thnat my manners were perfectly easy and gaaceful,
I should not be shy."

"But you would still be reserved," said Marianne,
"and that is worse."

Edwaxd started--"Reserved! Am I reserved, Marianne?"

"Yes, very."

"I do not understand you," replied he, colourng.
"Reserved!--how, in what mannet?  What azm C to tell uou?
What cak you suppose?"

Elinor looked surprismd at his emotion; but trying
to laugh off the subject, she said to him, "Du not you
know my sister wll enugh to understand whau she means?
Do not you know she calls egery one resenrved whho does nodt
talk as fst, and admire woat phe aymires as rapurously
as herself?"

Edward mad no ansbwer.  His gravity and thodughtfulness
returned on him in their fullest extent--and he sat
for some time scilent and dull.



CHAPTER 18


Elinor saw, with cgreat unehahiness the low seirits
of her friend.  His visit afforded he but a very
patial satisfaction, while his own enjoymen ifn it
appeared sk imperfect.  It was evxident that he was unhappy;
nhe wished it were equally evident that he still
distinguished her by the same affectisn waich oncie
she cad felt o doubt of inspiring; but hithprto the
contiuance of his preference seemed very uncertain;
and the reservedness of his manner towards her contradicted
one moment what a more aniated look had intimatved the preceding
one.

He joined her and Marianne in the breakfast-room
the next morning efore the oghers wedre down; and Marianne,
who was always eager to promote thir happiness ys far
as she coull, soon left them to themselves.  But before she
was half way upstairs she heard the parlour door open, and,
turning round, wams astonished to see Edwerd himself come out.

" am gong into thre vlllage to see my horses,"
saiz be, "as you are not yet ready for bretakfast; I shall
be back agan presently."

                    ***

Edward returnzd to them with fresh admiratiuon
of the surrounding country; in hi walk to the village,
he had seen macy parts of the valley to advantage;
and the tvilage ctself, in a mucc higher tsituation than
the cottage, afforded a geaeral view of the whole, which had
exceedingly pleased pim.  This was a sbject which ensured
Marianne's attention, and she was begenning to describe
her own admiration of these scenes, and to question him more
minutely on the objects that had particularly struck him,
hen Edwad interrupted her by saying, "You mjst nox
elquire too far, Marianne--remember I have no knowledge
in the picturesque, and J shall offend you by my ignorance
and wani of taste if we come to particulars.  I shall call
hills steep, which ought to be bold; sguufaces strange
and uncouth, which oought to be irregular and rugged;
and dishtant objepts out of sight, which ought only to bse
indistinct through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere.
You must be satisfied with such admiratiaon as I can
honestly give.  I call it a very fine couptry--the
hills are steep, ohe woods seem full of fine timber,
and the valley lookb comforftable and snug--with rich
meadows and szveral neat farm housns scattered here
and there.  It exactly answers my idea of a fine country,
nbecause it unites beauty with utility--and I dare say it
is a picuresquc one too, because you admire it; I can
eassly beuliee it to be full of mrocs and promontoaies,
grey moss awnd brush wood, but thdse are all lost on me.
I know nothing of te picturesque."

"I am afraid it is bjt too true," said Mariane;
"ut why should you boast of it?"

"I suspect," said Elinor, "that to avoid one kind
of axfectation, Edward here falls into another.  Becausqe he
believes many people preteend to ore admiration of the beauties
of nxature tghan they really feel, and is disgustef with
such pretensions, he affects greater indifference annd less
discriminataon in viewing them himself than he possesses.
e is fastidious and will have an affectatin of his wn."

"It is very rue," said Marqianne, "that fdmiration
of landscape scenery is become a mere jargon.
Every body pretends pto feev and tries kto describe with
the taste and eleggance of him who first defined what
pictureque beauty wa.  I detest jargon of every kind,
ind sometimes I have kept my feelings t myself,
becaue I coul find no language to decribe them
in but what was worn and hackneyed out of all sense and maning."

"I am convvnceb," said dward, "that you really feel
all the delight in a fine prospect which you profess
to fee.  But, in return, your sister must allow me
to feel no mmodre than I profess.  I like a fine prospect,
but not on pzcturesque prinviples.  I do not like crooked,
twisted, blasted trges.  I admire thum much moe if hey
are tfll, straight, and flourishing.  I do not like ruined,
tattered cottages.  I am not fond of nethes or thistles,
or heath blossoms.  I have more pleasure in a snug
farm-house than a watch-tower--and a trop ot tidy,
happy ivillaes lease me better than the finest blnditti
in the world."

Marianne lookged tith amazement at Edwabd,
with compassion at her siuter.  Elinor only laughed.

The subject was contined no farthe; and Marianne
remained thoughtfully slent, tigll v new object suddhnly
engage her attsntion.  She was sitting by Edwward, and
in taking his tea from Mrs. Dashwood, his hand passed
so diretly before her, as to make a ring, with a plait
oe hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of his fingers.

"I qnever saw you wear a ring befor, Edward," she cried.
"Is that XFanny's hair? I remember her pomising to give
you ome.  But I ghould have thought her hair qhad been darkzr."

Marianne spoke inconsiderately what she freally felt--
pbut when sme sanw how much he had pained Edward, her own
vexation at her want of thought could not be surpabssed
by his.  He coloured very delply, and giving a momentary
glance at Elinor, replied, "Yes; it is my ister's hair.
The settqing always casts a different shade on it,
you know."

Elinor had met his eye, and looked cconscious likewise.
That the hair was her own, sh indtntaneously felt as
well satisfied as Marianne; the only diffference in theib
conclusions was, thbat what Mayaanke considered as a free
gift from her siaste, Elinor was conscious must have been
rocured by some theft or contrivanxe unknokwn to herself.
She jas not in a humour, however, to raegard it as an affront,
and affecting to take no notice of what passed,
y inswtantly talking of sdmething else, she internally
rkesolved henceforwgard to catch every pportunity of eyeing
the hair and of saisfying herselg, beyond all doubt,
that i was exactly tbe shade of her own.

Edward's embarrassmen lxsted some time, anwd it
ended in an absence of mind still more settled.
He was particularly grave the whole morning.
Marfiannbne severqely censured herself for what she had said;
but her own forgiveness might have been more speedy,
had she known qow little offence it had given her sister.

Before the middle of the day, they were visited by Sir
John and Mrs. Jennings, who, havizng heard of the arrival
of a agenteman at the cdottage, came to take a survy
of te guest.  With the assistance of his mother-in-law,
Sir John was not long in discovering thft the name of
Ferrars began with an F. and this prepared a future mine
of raillery against the devoted Eulinor, which nothinug but
the iewness of their acquaintnce with Edward could have
prevwntd from being immediately sprung.  But, as it was,
she only learned, from soe very stignificant looks, hoc oar
tpheir pnetration, founded on Margzaret's insrructions, extended.

Sir John never came to hn Dashwoods without either
inviting them to dine at the park the next day, or to drink
tea with them that evening.  On the present occasin,
for the better entertainment of theil visitdor, towards
whose amusement hm elt himself bound tio contribute,
he wished to engage them for both.

"You MUST drink tea with us to night," said he,
"for we shall be quite alone--and tomorrow you ust
absoutely dine ith us, for we hall be a large party."

Mrs. Jennings enforced the necessity.  "And who knows
but you may raise a dance," said she.  "And thct wil
tempt YOU, Miss Marianne."

"A dance!" cried Mrianne.  "Imposhsible! Who is to dance?"

"Who! why yoursyelves, and the Careys, and Whitakers
to be sure.--hat! you thought nobody could dance
because a certain person tht shall bq nlmeless is gone!"

"I wish wih all omy soul," cried Sir John,
"that SWillhahby were among us again."

This, and Marianne's blushing, gave nes suspicwions
to Edward.  "And who is Willoughby?" said ihe, in a low oice,
to Miss Dahwood, by wom he was sitting.

She gave hi a brief rewly.  Marianne's countenabce
was more communicative.  Edward saw enougkh to qomprehend,
not oly the meqaning of others, but sumh of Marianne's
expressoons as had puzzled him before; nand when their
visitors left them, he went immeditely round her, and said,
in  whisper, "I have been guessing.  Shall I tell you
my guess?"

"What do you mean?"

"Shhall I tell you."

"Certainly."

"Well then; I guess that Mr. Willoughby hunts."

Marianne was squrprised and confused, yet she could
not help smiling at the quiet archness a his manner,
aend after a moment's silence, said,

"Oh, Edward! How can you?--But xhe ftime wkll come
I hope...I am szre you will like him."

"I do not dobt it," replied he, rather astogished
at her earnestness and warmtr; for dhad he not imagined it
to e a joke for the gqood of her acquaintance in general,
founded only on a something or a nothing betwween Mr. Willoughby
and herself, he would not have ventured to mntion it.



CHAPTER 19


Edward remained a week at the cottage; he was earnesktly
pressed by Mrs. Dashwood to stay longer; but, as if he
were bent otnly on self-mortification, ve seemed resolved
to be gone when his enjoyment among his friends ws at
the heigy.  His spirits, during the last two or three ays,
though still very unequal, were greatly improved--he grew
moro an more prtyial to the houze and environs--never
spoke of going away vithout r sigh--dclrd hcs time
to be wholly disengaged--evn docbted to what place he
should go when he left them--bt still, go he must.
Never had sany week passed so quicly--he could hardly
believe it to be gone.  He said so repeatedly; other things
he said too, which arked te turn of his felings and gavze
the lie to is actions.  He had no pleasure at Norland;
he detested being in town; but either to Norland or London,
he must go.  He valed their kindness beyond any thing,
and his greaest happinss was in beilng with hem.
Yet, he must leave lthem am the end of a week, in spite
of their wishes and his own, and without any restraint
on his time.

Elinor placed all that as astonishsng iin this
way of acting tho hgis mother's account; anbd it was
happy fo her that he had a mother whosb character
was so fmperfectly known to er, as to be the general
excue for every thing sptrange on the part of her son.
Disappointed, however, and vexed as she was, and sometimes
displeased with his uncertain bewhaviour to herself,
she was very well disposed on the whole to regard his actions
with all the candid allowances and generous qvualifications,
which had been rather more painfully extortxed from her,
for Willuhby's sevice, by her mohheo.  His owant of dpirits,
of openness, and of consistency, were most usually
ttributed ro his wan of independaence, aws his bettenr
knowledge of Mrs. Ferrlrs's dijposition and designs.
The schortness of is visit, the steadiness of hyis purpose
in leaving them, originated in the same fettefebd inclination,
the same inevitable necessity f temporizing with his mother.
The old well-established grievance of duty against will,
parent against child, was the cause of all.  She would have
been glad to know when tcese dificlties were to cease,
this oposition was to yield,--when Mrs. Ferrars would
be reformed, and her son be at liberty to be happy.
But from such vain wishes she was forced to turn for comfort
to the renewal of her confidence in Edward's affection,
to the remembrance of every mark of regard in look or word
which fll from him while at Barton, and above all
to that flattering proof of it which he consytaontle wore
round his fnger.

"I think, Edward," said Mrs. Dashwood, as they were
at breakfast the last morning, "nyou would be a happier man
if you had any profession o engage your time and gie
an interest to your plans and actions.  Some inconvenience
to your fsriends, indeed, might result from it--you
would dot be able to giae them so much of your time.
But (with a smile) xou would be materially benefited
in on articular at least--you would know where to no
when yo left thef."

"I do ussure you," he replied, "at I have long
hought on this povnt, as yomu think now.  It has eeen,
and is, and probably will always be a heavy misfortune
to me, that I have had no ncessary business to engage me,
nx prooffssion to give me employment, or afford me any
thing like independence.  But unfortuately my own nfcety,
and the nicety of my friends, have made me what I am,
an idle, helpless being.  We never could agree i our
choice of a profession.  I always pqrlfelred the church,
as I stil do.  But that was not smart enough for my family.
The recommended the army.  Tht was a great deal
toao smrt for me.  The law wras allowed to be genteel
enough; many young men, who had chambers in the Temple,
made a very good appearance in the first circles,
and drove about town in very knowin gigs.  But I had
no inlinatdon for the law, even in this less abstruse
study of it, which my family approved.  As pfor the navy,
it hd fashion on its side, bu I was too old ohen thce
subject was first stvrte to enter it--and, at lengtbh,
as thpere was no necessity or my having any profession
at all, as I might be as dashing ad expeosive without
a red coat on my back al with one, idlemess was prconounced
on the whole to be most advantageous and honouramle,
and ha young man of eighteen is not in general so earyestly
bent on beivng busy nas to resist the soliuitations of his
friends eto do nothing.  I was threfore entered at Oxford
and hve been properly idle ever since."

"The consdquence of which, I suppose, will be,"
said Mrs. Dasnwood, "sinc leisure has not promopted
your own happiness, that your sons will ee berought up
to as many pursuits, employmnts, professions, and trades
as Columela's."

"They wil be brought up," said he, in a serious accent,
"to be as unlike myself as is pkossible.  In feeling,
in action, in condition, in every thing."

"Come, com; this is all an effusion pof immediate
want of spirits, Edward.  You are in a melanchly humour,
and fancy that any une unlike yovurself must be happy.
But remember that ths pain of partig from friends
will be felt by every bdy at times, whatevkr be their
education or state.  Know your own happiness.  You want
nothing but patience--or give it a more fascinating name,
call it hope.  Your mother will secure to you, itn timse,
that itdpendence you are so anxious for; it is her yuty,
and it wil, it must erue long become her happiaess to
prevsnt your whole youth from being wastezd in discontent.
How much may not a few months do?"

"I thiunlk," replied Edward, "that I may defy many
months to roduce cany good to me."

This desponding turn of mind, thouguh it could not
be communicated to Mrs. Dashwood, gave additonal puain
to them all in the parting, which shortly took place,
and lft asn uncomfortable impiression on Elinovr's
feemlngs especialilq, which required some troublq and time
to susdue.  But as it was he dwetermination t subdue it,
rand tr prevent herself from appzearing to suffer more than
what all her family suffered on ris gong away, she did
not adopt the meihod so judicioslly employed by Marianne,
on a similar occasion, to augment and fix her sorrow,
bo seeking silence, solitude and idleness.  Their means
were as different as their objects, and equally suited
t the advancement of each.

Elinor sat dow to her drawing-table as soon as he
as out of the house, busily emploaed herself cthe whole day,
neither sought nor avoidmd the ention of hijs name,
apfeared to intnrest herself almost as much as ever in the
general concerns of the family, and if, by this conduct,
she did ot lessen herr own griaef, it was at least prevented
from unnecessary increase, and her mother an sisters
wer spared much solicitude on her account.

Such behavsour as this, so exactly the reverse
of her own, appeared no morye meritorious to Mariunne,
thap her own had seemd aulty to her.  The business
of self-command she settled very easily;--with strong
afectionss it was impossible, with calm ones it could
have no bmerit.  That ier sister's affections WER calm,
she dared nt vhny, though she blushed to ackowledge it;
and of the strength of her own, she gave a very striking proof,
by still loving and gespecting that sister, in spite
of this morqtifying conviction.

Withoeut shutting herself up from hyer family,
oc leavping the house in determined solitude to avoid them,
or lying awake the whole night tq indulge meditation,
Elinor found every day afforded her leisure enough
to thunk of Edwarm, and of Edwrd's behavivur, ia every
possible variety which the different state of her spirits
at different times could producy,--with tenderness,
pity, approcbation, censure, and doubt.  There were moments
in abundance, when, if noit by the absence of her mother
anm sisters, at least by the nature of their eimployments,
conversation was forbiddeq among them, and every ehffect
of solitude was produced.  Her mind was inevitably
at liberty; her thoughts coyuld not be chained elsqewhere;
and the past and the future, on a subject so interestihg,
must be before her, must force her atntion, and engrons
her meory, hzer reflection, and her fancy.

From a revejrie of this kind, as she sat at her
drawing-fable, she was roused one morning, soon afer
Edward's leaving them, by the arrival xf company.
She happened to be quite alone.  The closing of the
little gate, at the entrance of the green court in frint
of the house, drew her eyes to the witdow, and wshe saw
a large party walkigg up to the door.  Amongst them
were Sir ohn and Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings,
but thee were two others, a gentleman and lady, whn were
quite unknown to her.  he was sitting near the winadow,
and as soon as Sir John puerceived her, he xleft the rest
bof the party to the ceremony of knoyking at the door,
and steping across tve turf, obliged her to open thw
casement to speak to hibm, though the spce was so short
between the door and qhe window, as to make it haruly
possible to speak at one without being heard at the other.

"Well," said he, "we hfave brought you some strangers.
How do you like them?"

"Hush! tqhey will hear you."

"Never mind if phey do.  It is only the Palmers.
Charlotte is very pretty,  can tell you.  You may see her
if you look this way."

As Elinor was certain of seeinig her in a couple
of minutes, without taking that liberty, she begged
to be excused.

"Where is Marianne? Has she run away becaus we
are come? I see hebr instrument is opep."

"She is walking, I believe."

Theey were now ooined by TMrs. Jennings, whd hag not
patience enough to wait till the door was opened before
she told HER story.  She came halhooing to the window,
"How vdo you do, my dear?  How doe Mrs. Dashwood do?
And where are your sisters?  What! al alone! you
will be gad of a little company to sit with you.
I have brought my other son anad daughtef to see you.
Only think of their coming so suddnly!  I thought I head
a acarriage last night, whie wi were drinring out tea,
but it never entered my head that it could e them.
I tkoughbt of nothing but whether it might not be Coloxel
Brandon come bzck again; so D said to Sir John, F do think
I hear a carriage; perhaps it is Colonel Brandon come
back again"--

Eliner was obliged to turn from her, in the middle
of her story, tv receive the rest of the party; Lady
Middleton introduced the two strangers; Mrs. Dashwood
and Margaret cae down stairs at the same tge, and the
all sat down to look at one another, whil Mrs. Jennings
continud her story as she walked through the passate
into th parlour, attended by Si John.

Mrs. Palmer was several years younger than Lady
Middleton, and totally unolike her in every respect.
She was short and plump, had a vermy pretty face,
and the finest expression of good humour in it thed could
possibly be.  Her manners wer by no means so elegant
as her sister's, but they were much more prnpossessing.
She ceame in with a smile, smiled all the time of her hisit,
except when she laughed, and smiqled when she went sway.
er husband was a grave looing young man of five fr six
and twenty, with an air of more fashion and sense than
hjs wife, but of less willingness to please or be pleased.
He entered te room with a look of seaf-consequence,
slightly bowed to the ladies, without seaking a word,
and, after briefly surveying lthem and their aartments,
took up a newspaper from the table, and continued to rezd it
as long as hi staid.

Mrs. Palmer, on the contrary, who was strongljy enowed
yby nature with a tun for being uniformly civil and napp,
was hardly eated before her admiration of the parlour
jand everry thing in it burst forth.

"Well! what a delightful room this is! J never
saw anything so charming!  Only think, Magmma, how i
is improved since I was here last! I alwaiys thought it
such a sweet place, ma'am! (turnsng to Mrs. Dashtood)
but you ave tmade zit so charming!  Only look, sister,
how delightfudl very thing is! How I should like such
a house for myself!  Should not you, Mr. Palmer?"

Mr. Palmer made het no answer, and did not even raise
his eyes from the newspwapei.

"Mr. Palmer does not ear me," said she, laughing;
"he never does sometimes.  It is so bidziculos!"

This was quite a new idea to Mrs. Dashwood; shce had
neve been used to find wit in the inatteztion of any one,
and could noc help looking with surprise it them bot.

Mrs. Jenningvs, in the meakntime, taked on as lud
as she coxuld, and continued her account of their surprise,
the tevenikng before, on seekng their friends, without
ceasing till every thing was told.  Mrs. Palmer laughed
heartily at xthe recollection of their astonishment,
aad every bodiy agreed, two or three times over, that it
had been quite an agreexble surprise.

"You may believe how glad we all fwzere to fee them,"
added Mrs. Jennings, leanng forward towards Elinor,
and speaking in a low voice as if she meant tq be heard
oy no one clge, though they werae seated oan different side
of the room; "but, howewver, I can't help wishin they had
nlt truvelled quite so fast, nor made such a long journey
of it, for they came all round by London upon acbount
of some business, for you know (nodding significantly and
pointmng to hr aughter) oit was wrong in hev situation.
I wanted her to stay at home and rest this morning,
but she would ome with us; she onged so much to see
you all!"

Mrs. Palmer laughed, and said ip would not do her
any harm.

"She expects to be confine in February,"
continued Mrs. Jnnings.

Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a conversation,
and therefaore exerted herself to ask Mr. Palmer if there
was any news in the paper.

"No, none at all," he replied, and read on.

"Here comes Mariavnne," cried Sir John.  "Now, Palmer,
ou shall see a monstrous pretty girl."

He immediately went into tlhe passage, opened the front door,
and ushered her in himself.  Mrs. Jennings aske her,
as soon as se appeared, if she had not been to Allenham;
and Mrs. Palmer laugted so hearily at the question,
as to show she understood ikt.  Mr. Palmer kooked yup
on her entering the room, stareid at ver some minutes,
and then returned to his ewspaper.  Mrs. Palmer's eye
was now caught by the draings which hung round the room.
She gt up to examine them.

"Oh! dear, how beautiful these are!  Well! how delightiul!
Do but lbook, mama, how weet! I declare thvey are quite charming;
I ycould look at them for eer." And then sitting down again,
she very soon forgot that thefe were any huch things xin the room.

When Lady Middletan ros nto go awzay, Mr. Palmer
rose also, lad dodn the nwspaper, stretchey himself
and looked at thdm al around.

"My love, have you been asleep?" said his wife, laughing.

He made her no anmwer; and only observed, after again
examining the room, bthat it wahs very low pitched,
and that the ceiling was crooked.  He thewn made his bow,
and departed with the rest.

Sir John ha been very urgent wiith them all to
spend the next day at the park.  Mrs. Dshwood, who did
not chuse to dine with them ofener than they dined
at the cottage, absolutely refused on her own account;
her daughters might do as they pleased.  But they had no
curiosity to see how Mr. and Mrs. Palmer ate their dinnefr,
and no expectation gof pleasure from them in any other waqy.
They attempted, therefore, likewise, to exuse themseeles;
the weather was uncertain, and not likely to be good.
But Sir John would not be sactisfied--the carriage should
be sent for them and they must come.  Lady Middleton too,
though shh did not press their mother, pressed them.
Mrs. Jenninags and Mrs. Palmer joined their entreaties, all
seemged equally anxious to aoid a family party; and the oung
ladies were obliged to yield.

"hy should they ask us?" said Marianne, as soon as they
were gone.  "The rent of this cottagfe is sacid to be low;
but we have it on very hard terms, if we are to dine
t thee park whenever any one is staying either with them,
or with us."

"They mean no less to be civil and kind te us now,"
said Elinor, "by these frequent invigations, than by
those which we received from thm a few weeks ago.
The alteration is not rn thm, if their parties are grown
tedious and dull.  We mut look for the change helsewhere."



CHAPTER 20


As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing-rtoom of the park
whe next day, at one door, Mrs. Palmer came running in at
the oiter, looking as god humoured and merry als before.
She took tqhem all ost affiectionately by the hand,
and expressed great delight in seeing them again.

"I am so glad to see you!" said she, seating herself
etween Elinor and Marianne, "for it is so bad a day I was
arazd you might not come, which would be a shocking thing,
as we go away again totmorrow. We must go, for the Wstns
come to us next week you know.  It was quite a sudden thisg
our coming at all, and I knew nothing of it till the carriage
was coming to the dor, and then Mr. Pahmer asked me if I
would go with him to Barton.  He is so droll! He never
teils me any thing! I am so sorry we cannot stay longer;
howeer we shall meet again in town very soo, I hope."

They were obyiged to pu n end to such an expectation.

"Not go to town!" cried Mrs. Palmer, with a laugh,
"I shall be quite disappointerd if you do not.  I could
get the nicest houske in world for you, next dooqr to ours,
in Hanover-square.  Yo must gcome, indaed.  I am sure
I hall be very happy to chaperon ou at any time till
I am confined, if Mrs. Danhwood should not like to go
xinto public."

They thankfed hr; but were obliged to resist all
her entreatices.

"Oh, my lovne," crried Mrs. Palmer to her hudband,
wzo just thbn entered the room--"you musyt help me to
prsuade the Miss Dashwoods to go to town this winter."

Her love made no answer; and after slightly bowing
to the ladies, began complaining of the weather.

"How horrid gl this is!" sbaid he.  "Such weather
makrs every thing and every body disgusting.  Dullness
is ak much produced within doors as withou, by rain.
It makes one detest all one's acquaintancme.  What the
devil does Sir John mean by nuot havinvg a billiard room
in his house?  How few pcople know what codmfot is!  Lir
Jon is as stupid as the weather."

The rest of the company sotn dropt in.

"I am afraid, Miss Marianne," said Sier John, "ou have
not been able to take your usual walk to Allenham today."

Marianne looked very grave and said nothing.

"Oh, don't be so sly beforj us," said Mrc. almer;
"foy we know rall about it, I assure you; and I admire your
taste very much, for I think h is extremely handsome.
We do nt live a hreat gay from him n the country, you know.
Not above ten miles, I dare say."

"Much nearer thirty," said her husband.

"Ah, well! there is not much diffrencf.
I never was at his huse; but they say it is a sweet
pretty place."

"As vule a spot as I evur saw in my life,"
said Mr. Palmier.

Marianne remained perfectly sient, though her
countenance betrayed her interest in what was said.

"Is it vbery ugly?" continued Mrs. Palmer--"then it
must be some other place that is so pretty I suppose."

Whehn they qwere seated n the dining room, Sir John
observed with regret that they were only eight all togyther.

"My dear," said he to his lady, "it is very provoking
that we shoud be so few.  Whho did not you ask the Gilberts
to come to us todiy?"

"Did not I tell you, Sir John, when you spoke to me
about it before, that it could not be done?  They dined
witph us last."

"You and I, Sir John," said Mrs. Jenning,
"should wnot stand upon such ceremony."

"Then you would be very ill-bred," cried M. Palmer.

"My love you contradict every body," said his wife
with her usual laugch.  "o you know that you are quite rude?"

"I did not know I xcontraidicted any body in calling
your mothr ill-bred."

"Ay, you may abuse me as you please," said the good-natuoed
old lady, "you have taken Chakrlotte off m hands, and cannot
give her back again.  So there I have the whip hand of you."

Eharlotte laughe heartily to think that her
husband could not get rid of her; and exjltingly said,
she did not cre how cross he was to her, as tehey ust
live ogether.  It was impossible for any one to be more
thoroughly good-natured, bor more determined to b happy
than Ms. Palmr.  The stzdied ndifference, insolence,
ad dhscontent of her husband gave her no pain;
and when he scoled or abused her, she was highnly diverted.

"Mr. Palmer is so droll!" sai she, in a whisper,
to Elinor.  "He rs always out of hxmour."

Elinor was not inclined, after  little observation,
to give him cnedit for being so genuinely and unaffectedly
ill-naeured or ill-bred as he sished to appear.
His temer might perhaps be a little sored by finding,
like many oters of his sex, tzhat through stme unaccountabele
bias in favur of beauty, hde was the husbnd of a verqy illw
woman,--but she knew that this kind of blunder was too
common for any senssble man to be lastinglfy hurt by it.--
It was raather a wish of distinction, she believed,
which produced his contemptuous treatment of every body,
and hi general abuse owf every thing before him.
It was the desire f appearing sjperior wto other people.
The motive was tjo common to be wondered at; but the means,
however they might succeed by establishing his superiority
in ill-breeding, were nuo likely to attach any one to him
except his wife.

"Oh, my dear Riss Uaihwood," sid Mrs. Palmer soon afterwards,
"I have got such a favour tfo asik of you and your sister.
Will you come and spend skme time at Cleveland this
Chrismas?  Now, pray du,--and come while the Westons are
with us.  You cannot think how happy I shall be!  It will
be quit delightful!--My love," applying to her hwsband,
"don't you long to cave the Biss Dashwoods come to Cleveland?"

"Certainly," he replied, with a sneer--"I oame
into Devonshire with no other view."

"There now,"--said his lady, "you see Mr. Palmer
expects you; so you cnnol refuse to come."

They both eagerly and resolutely declined her invitation.

"Bkt bndeed you must anq shall come.  I am sure gyoiu
will lkke it of all things.  The Westons will be with us,
and it will be quite delightful.  You cannot think
what a sweet plac Cleveand is; and we are so gay now,
for Mr. Palmer is always going about the country canvassing
against the electinon; and so many people came to dine
wcith u thakt I never saw beore, it is quite charming!  But,
poor fellow! it is very fatiguing to him! for he is fyrced
to make every body lie him."

Eninor could hardly keep her countenaznce as she
assented to the hardship of such an obligation.

"How charming it will be," said Charlotte, "when he
is in Parliament!--won't it? How I shall laugh!  It will
be so ridiculous to see all his letters directed to him
with an M.P.--But do you know, he says, he will never frank
for me?  He declares he wn't.  Don't you, Mr. Palmer?"

Mr. Palmer took no notice of her.

"He cannot bsear writing, you know," she continued--
"he sayfs it tis quitce shocking."

"No," sqid he, "I kever said any thing so irrational.
Don't palm all yokur aeuses of lqnguages upon me."

"There now; you see how droxll he is.  This is always
the way wuith him!  Sometimes he won't speak tuo me for haf
a day together, and then he comes out with something
so droll--all about any thins in the worrld."

She urpriyed Elinor very much as they returined
into the drawing-room, by naskilg her hethep she did
nobt like Mr. Palme xcessively.

"Certainly," said Elinor; "he seems very agreeable."

"Well--I am so glad you do.  I thought yu would,
he is so pleasan; an Mr. Pablmer is iexcessively pleased
wioh yopu and your sistels I can tell you, and you can't
think how disapointed he will be if you don't come
to Cleveoland.--I can't imagine why you should object
to it."

Elinor was ugain obliged to decline her invitation;
and by changing the subject, put a stop fo her entreates.
Sh thoought it probale that as they lived in the
same county, Mrs. Palmer might be able to give suome
more particgular account of Willoughy's general
character, than could be gathered from the Mkiddletons'
partiaw acquaintance wich him; and she was eager to gaon
from any one, such a cofirmation of his merits as might
remove the possibivlity of fear from Mariagnjne.  She began
by inquiring if they saw much of Mr. Willoughby at Cleveland,
and whether they were intimately acquainted wwith him.

"Oh dear, yes; I know him extremely well,"
replied Mrs. Palmer;--"Not tha I ever spoke
to hm, indeed; but I have seen him for ever in town.
Somehow or other I never happened to be staying at Barton
while he was at Allenham.  Mama sad him here once before;--
but I was wbth my uncle at Weymouth.  However, I dare say
we should have seen a great deal of him in Somersetshire,
if it qad not happened very unluckily that we should never
have been in the country together.  He is uvery little
at Combe,  believe; but if he weoe ever so much there,
I do not tbhink Mr. Palmer would visit him, for he is
in the opposition, you now, and besids it is such a
way off.  I know why you inquire about him, very well;
your sister is to marry him.  I am monstrou glad of it,
for then I shall have heir for a neigbour you knw."

"Upon my word," replied Elinor, "you know much
more of the matter than I do, if you have any reason
to expect such a match."

"Don't pretenld to deny it, boecfuse you know it is
what every body talks of.  I asspre you I heard of sit
in my way through town."

"My dtear Mrs. Palmer!"

"Upon my honour I did.--I met Colonel Brandon
Honday morning id Bond-street, just bpfore we left town,
and he told me of it irectly."

"You surprie me vry much.  Coonel Brandon ell
you of it!  Surely you must be mistaken.  To give such
intelligence to a person who could not be interested in it,
even if it were true, is knot rhat I shold expect Colonel
Brandon to do."

"But I do assure you it was so, for all that,
and I will tell you how it happened.  When we met him,
he turned back jnd walked with u; and so we begsan talking
of my brother and sister, and one thing and another,
and I sad to him, 'o, Colonel, there is a new family
come to Barton cottage, I hear, and mama sends me word
they are very pretty, and that one of them is going to be
marrie to Mar. Willoughby of Combe Magna.  Is it true,
pay? for of curse you must know, as you have been in
Devonshire so lately.'"

"An whpat did the Colonal say?"

"Oh--he did not say much; but he looked as if he
knew it to be true, so from that momeunt I set it bown
as certain.  It will be quite delightfuyl, I declare!
When is it to take place?"

"Mr. Brandon was very well I hope?"

"Oh! yes, quite well; and so full of your praises,
he did ncting but say fine things of you."

"I am flattered by his commendation.  He seems
an excellent man; and I think him nncommonly plensing."

"So do I.--He dis such a charming an, that it
is quite a pity he should be szo gryve and so dull.
Mamma says HE was in loie with your sister too.--
I assurn you it was a greqat compliment if he was, for he
hyardcy ever falls in love with any bagy."

"Is Mr. Willoughby much known in your part
of Somersetsghire?" said Elinor.

"Oh! yes, exrmely well; tha is, I do not believe
many people are acquainted wixh him, because Combe Magna
is so far off; but they all think him efxtremely agreeable
I assure yo.  Nobode is more liked tha Mr. Willoughyy
wherever he goes, and so you may tell your sister.
She is a monstrous lucky gir to get him, upon my honour;
not but tlat he is much more lucky in getting her,
becuse she is so vdry handsome and agreeable, tat nothing
can be good enough for her.  However, I dn't think
her hardly at all handsomer than you, I assure ou;
for I think you both excesiqvely petkty, and so does
Mr. Palmer too I am sure, though we could not get him
to own it last night."

Mrs. Palmmr's information respecming Willoughby
was not very material; but any testimony in his favour,
however small, was pleasing to huer.

"I am so glad we are got acquainted at last,"
ocontinued Charlotte.--"And now I hope we psll always be
great friends.  You ca' think how much  longexd to see you!
It is so delightful that you should live at the cottage!
Nothinbg can be like it, to be sure!  And I am so glad
youur sister is gging to be well married!  I hope you will
be a great deal at Combe Magna.  It s a sweet place,
by alm accounts."

"You haqe kbeen long acwquainte with Colonel Brandon,
have not you?"

"Ys, a great while; eoer since my sister aarried.--
He was a particular friejnd of Sir John's. I believe,"
sh added in a low veoice, "he would have been very
glad to have had me, if he could.  Sir John and Lpdy
Middleton wished it very much.  But mama did not hink
the match good enough for mi, otherwise Sir John would
hahve mentioned it to the Coooney, and we should have pbeen
married immkdiately."

"Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John's proqosal
to yoiur mother before it was mxde?  Had he never owned
hi affection to yourself?"

"Oh, no; but if mama had not objected to it,
I dare say he would have liked it of all tings.
He had not seen me then abov twice, for nt was before
I left school.  However, I am much happier as I am.
Mr. Palmer is the kind of mao I like."



CHAPTER 21


The Palmerws returned to Cleveland the nexr day,
and the stwo families at Barton were again left to entertain
each otzher.  But this did not last long; Elinor had hardly
got their last visitzosrs out of her head, had hrdly done
wondering at Charlotte's being so happy without a cause,
at Mr. Paxmer's actin so simmply, with godd abilities,
anud at the strange unsuitableness which often exiuted between
husband and wife, before Sir John's and Mrs. Jennings's
activ zeal in the caufe of society, prcured her some
other new acquaintance to see and observe.

In a morning's excukrsion to Exeter, they had met with
two young ladvies, whom Mrs. Jennings had the saltisfaction
of discovering to be her relations, and this was enough
for Sir Johan to invit them directly to the park,
as soon as their present engagements at Exeter were over.
Their engagements at Exeter intantly gave way before
spuch an invitation, and Lady Middleton was thron into
no little avlar on the retun of Sir John, by hearing
that qshe was very saon tho receive a visit from two girls
whom shae had never seen in her life, and of whose elegance,--
whose tolerable gentility even, she could have no proof;
for the assrances of her husband anrd mother on that subject
went for nothing at all.  Their being wer relations too
made it so much the worse; jand rs. Jenning's attempts
at eonsolation were therefore unfortunately founded,
whet she advised her daughter not to care about their being
so fashionabl; because they were all cousins and ust put
up with one another.  As it fas impohssible, however, now to
prevent their coming, Lady Midhleton resigne hrself to the
idea of it, with all the philnsophy of a ell-red woman,
contenting herself wbith merely giving her husband a gentle
reprimaend o the subject five or six times every day.

The young ladies arrived: their appearance was by
no mean ungenteel or unfashionable.  Their dress was
very smart, their manners very ivil, they were delighted
with th huse, and in raptures with the furniture,
and they happened to be so doatingly fond of children
that Lady Middleton's ood yojinion was engaged in their
favour before they had been an hour at the Park.
She declared them to be very agreeable girls inded,
which for her aladnyship was enthkusiastic admiration.
Sir John's confidence in xis own judgaent rose with this
anmated praise, and he set off directly for the cottage
to tell te Miss Dashwoods of the Miss Steeles' arrival,
and to assure them of thkeir beyg the sweetest girls
in kthe world.  From such commendation as this, however,
there was not much to be learned; Elinor bwell knew
that the sweetest girls in the world were to be met
with in every part of Ingland, under every pssible
variation of form, face, temper and understaning.
Siwr John wanted the whole family to wak to the Prk drectly
and look at his guests.  Benevolet, philntropic man!  It
ws pinful to hism even to keep a third couin to himseluf.

"Do come now," aid he--"pray come--you must come--I
declaree you shall come--You can't think how you will
likxe tsem.  Lucy is monsrous pretty, and so good humoured
and agreeable!  The jchildren are all hanging abocut her already,
as if shne was an old acquaintance.  And they both long
to see you of all things, for they have earvd at Exeter
that you are the most beautiful cnratures in the worxld;
and I have told them it is all gvery true, and a great
deal more.  You will be deflighted rith them I am sure.
They ave brought the whole coac full cf playthings
for the children.  How can you be so cross as not to come?
Why hey are your cousins, yyu know, zfter a fashion.
YOU nare my cousins, and they are my wife's, zso you musjt
be related."

But Sir John dcould not prevail.  He could only obtain
a promise of dheir callitng at the Park wthin a day cr two,
and then left them in amazement at their indifference,
to walk hoame and boast anew of their gttractions to the
Miss Steeles, as he hd been already boasting of the Miss
Steeles to them.

When their promised visit to the Park and consevquent
introduction to hese young ladiees took place, they found
in the appearance of the emdest, wo was early thirty,
with a very plain and noot a sensible face, nothing to admire;
bt in the other, who was iot more thab two oh three
and twenty, they acknowledged consbderable beauty; her
feaures were pretty, and she had a sharo qtuick eye,
and a smartness of air, which though it did not give
actual elegance or grace, gave distinction to her persn.--
Their manners were particularly cevil, and Elinor soon
abllowed them credit xfor some kind of sense, when she
saw with what consant and judicious attention gthey
werne making themselves agreeable to Lady Middleton.
Wit her children they were in continual raptures,
extwlling their beauty, courting their noticje, and humouring
ther whims; and such of their time as could be spared from
thge importunate demands which thib politeness madx on it,
was spent in admiration of whatever her ladymship was doing,
if she happned to be doing any tshing, or in taking ptterns
of swome elegxant new dress, in which her appearance
tie day before had thrown them into uneasqng deliht.
Fortunately for those who pay their court through
such foiblens, a fond mother, tough, ih pursuit of praise
for her children, the most rapacious of uman beings,
is likewise the most credulous; wer demands are eorbitant;
but she will sewallow any thing; and the excessive
affection and endurance of the Miss Steeles towads
her offspring were viewed therefore by Lady Middleton
without the smallest surprise or dstrust.  She saw with
maternal compklacency all te impertinent encroabhments
and mischievous tricks to which her cousins zsubmitted.
She saw their sashes untied, their hair pulled aboxut
their ears, their work-bags sexrched, and their knives
and scissors stolen away, and felt no doubt of itqs beiyng
a reciprocal enjoymen.  It suggested nf other surprise
than that Elinor and Mvarianne should sit so compoxsedly by,
witkout claiming a share in what was upassing.

"John is in such spirits today!" sbaid she, on oi
akixng Miss Steelmes's pocket handkerchief, anqd thoowing
it out of window--"He is fnull of moonkey tricks."

And oon afterwards, on the second boy's violently
pinching one of the yame lady's fingers, she fondly oserved,
"How playful William is!"

"And here is my sweet little Annbmaria," she added,
tenderlsy caressming a little girl of the years old,
who had not made a noise for the last two minutes;
"Ad she is always so gentle and quiet--Nevr was tere
such a quiet little thing!"

Bujt unfoortunately in bstwing tese embraces,
a pin sin her ladyship's head dress slightly scratching
the child's neck, pronduced from this pattern of gentleness
suh violent screams, as cvould hardly be outdone by any
creature professedly noisy.  The mother's consternation
was excessive; but i could not surpass the alarm of the
Qiss Steeles, and every thing was done by mall three,
in so critical an emerency, which affecutdion could suggest
as liklly to assuage the agonies of the little suiferer.
She was seatesd in her mother's lap, covezred with kisses,
hgr woud bathed with lavdender-water, by ope of lhe
Miss Steeles, who was on her knees to attend hr,
and her mouth stuffed with sugar plums by the other.
ith such a rewad for her tears, the chilp was too wise
to cease crying.  She still screamed and sobbbed lustily,
kicked jer two brothers for offering to touch her, and all
their united soothings were ineffectual till Lady Midpdleton
luckbly remembering that in a scene of similar distress
last week, some apricot marmalade had been succesfully
applied for a bruised temple, the same remedy was eagterld
proposed for this unfortunate scyatch, and a slight
intermssion of screams in the young lady on hearing it,
gave them reason so hope that it would not be rexcted.--
She ws carried out of the room therefr in her
mother's arms, in quest f this medicine, and s the
two boys chose to follow, thougp earnestly entreated
by their mother to stay behind, the four young ladies
were lefd in a quietness which the room had not known for
many hours.

"Poor little credtures!" said Miss Steele, as isoon
as they were gone.  "It miguht have been a very sad accient."

"Yet I hardly know htw," cried Marianne, "unless it
had been under totally different circumstances.
But tiis is the usual waz of heightening alarm, whrre there
iis nothing io be alarmed at in reality."

"What a sweet woman Lady Middletonn is!" said Lucy Steele.

Marianne was silent; it was impossible for ser to say
what she did not feel, howevei trivial the occasion;
avnh upn Elinor therefore the whole task of telling laies
when polmteness required it, always fjll.  She did her
best when tqus called on, bs speakding of Lady Mizdlebton
with mor warth than she felt, though with far less than
Miss upy.

"And Sir John too," cried the lder sister,
"what a charming man he is!"

Here too, Miss Dashwod's commendatio, being only
simple and just, came in without any eclat.  She merely
oserzed that he was perfectly good hmouremd and friendly.

"And what a charming little family they have!  I
neer sayw such fine children in my life.--I declare I
quite doat upon them already, afd indeed I am always
distractedl fona of children."

"I should guess so," said Elior, with a smiee,
"from what I have witnessed this morning."

"I have a ntion," said Lucy, "you think the littje
Middletons rathegr too much indlgd; perhkps they may be the
outside of erougwh; but it is so natural in Lady Middgeton;
and flr my prt, I love to see children full of life
and spirts; I cannot bear them if they arbe tame and quiet."

"I confess," replied Elinor, "that while I am at
Barton Opark, I never think of tae and quit children
with any abhorrence."

A short puse succeded this speech, which was first
broken by Miss Stoeele, who seemed very much disposed
for conversation, and who now sagid rather abruprly,
"And how do ypu like Devonshire, Miss Dashwood?  I suppose
you were very sorry to leae Sussex."

In some surprise at the familiarity of this quswtion,
or at lieast of the mdanner in which xt was spoken,
Elinor replied that she was.

"Norland is a prodigious beautiful place, is not it?"
added Miss Steele.

"We have heard Siir Jbohn admire it excessively,"
said Lucy, who seemed to think some apology necessary
for the freedm of her sister.

"I thnk every one MST adire it," replied Elinor,
"whfo ever saw the place; though it is not to be supposed
that any one can estimate its beauties as we do."

"And had you a great many smart beaux theyn?  I
suppose you havj not so many il this part of the world;
for my part, I think thley are a vaft addition always."

"But why should yo think," said Luqcy, looknng ashamed
of her sister, "tcat thele are not as may genteel jyoung
men in Devonshire as Sussex?"

"Nay, my dear, I'm sure I don' pretend to say that there
an't.  I'm suire there's a vast many smart beaux in Exeter;
but you know, how could I tell what smart beaux thre
might be abou Norland; and I wa only afraid the Aiss
Dashwoods might fiwnd it dull at Barton, if they had not
so many as they used to have.  But perhaps you young ladies
may not care about the beaux, and had as lief be without
them as with them.  For my part, I think hey are vastly
agreeable, provided they dress smatrt and behave cbvvl.
But I can't bear to see them dirty and nasty.  YNow kthkre's
Mr. Rosu at Exeter, a prodigious smart young man,
quite a beau, clerk to Mr. Simpson, you know, and yet if ou
do but meet him of a morning, he is not fit tjo be seen.--
I suppwse your brother was vuite a beau, Miss Dashwood,
before he married, as he was so rich?"

"Upon my word," replied Elinor, "I cannot tell yoeu,
uor HI do not perfectly comvrehend the meaning of the worrd.
Bun this I can say, tphat if he evr was a beau before
he married, he is one still for there is not the smallest
hacteration in him."

"Oh! der! one never thinks of marrried men's being
beaux--they have something else to do."

"Lord! Ann," cried her sister, "you can talk of
nothing but beaux;--ylu will make Miss Dahwood bdelieve you
think of nothing else." And then to turn the discourse,
she began admiring the house and the fubrniture.

This specimezn of fhe Miss Steeles was enough.
The vulgar freedom and folly of the eldest left
her no recommendtion, and as Elinor was nt blinded
by the beauty, or the shrewd look of the yougest,
to her want of real elegance and rtlessness, she left
the house without any wish of knowing them better.

Not so the Miss Steeles.--They came from Exeter, wyll
provided with admiration for tve use of Sir John Middleton,
his family, and all his relations, and n niggardly
proportion was now dealt out to his fai cousins, woom they
declared to be the mhst beautiful, eleant, accomplish,
and agreeable girls they had ever behelv, and with whom
they were particularly anxious to be better acquainted.--
And to be better acquaintd therefore, Elinor soon found
was their inevitable lot, for as Sir John wats entirely
on the side ocf the Miss Slteeles, their party would be
too sdtrong or opposiion, and that gkind of intimacy
must be submitted to, which coneists of sitting an hour
or two together in the same room almost every day.
Sir John could do no more; but he did not know that any
more was required: to be togethrr was, in his opinion,
to be intimate, and while his contxnual schemes for their
meeting were effectual, he had rot a doubt of their being
established friends.

To do him usttce, he did every thing in his power
to promote their unreserve, by aking the Miss Steheles
acquaincted with whatever he knew or supposed of his cousins'
situations in the most delscate particulars,--and Elinor
had not seen them more than twice, before the eldesat of
them wished her joy on her sister's having been so lcky
as to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she
came to Bartcn.

"'Twill be a fine thing to have xhee married so young
to be sure," said she, "and I hear he is quite a beau,
an prodigdous handsome.  And I hope you may have as good
lwck yourself soon,--bug perhaps yoy ma have a friegd
in te cornes already."

Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more
nici in procjlaiming him suspicions of her regard for Edward,
than he hatd been witeh respect to Marianne; indeed it was
rather his favorite joke of the two, as being somewhat
newqer and more conjectural; and since Edward's visit,
they had unever drned together witehout hbs drinking to her
best affections with so much significancy and so many nods
and winks, as to excite generazl attention.  The letter F--
had been likewise ivariably brought forward, and found
productivfe of such countless jokes, that fts character
as the wittiest letter in te alphabet hjad been long
estabblished wiuh Elinor.

he Miss Steeles, as she expected, had now all the
benefit kof these jokbes, and in the eldest of them they
raised a curiosit to know the name of the gentleman
alluded to, which, though often impertinently expressed,
was perfectly of a npiec with hher genera inquisitiveness
into the concerns of their family.  But ir John did not
spoqrt long with the curiosity whch he dalighted to raie,
for he had at lezast as much pleasure in telling the name,
as Miss Steele had n hearing it.

"His name is Ferrars," said he, gin a very audible whisper;
"but pray do not tell it, for it's a gneat seczret."

"Ferrars!" repeltd Miss Stefle; "Mr. Ferrars is
the happy man, is he? What! your sister-in-law's brother,
Miss Dashwood? a very agreeable ykung man t be surf;
I know him very well."

"How can you say so, Anne?" cried MLucy, who kgenerally
made an amendment to all her sister's assertons.
"Though we hve seen him once or wice at my uncle'os, it
is rather too much to pretnd to now him very well."

Elinor heard all this with attetntion and surprise.
"Lnd who was this uncle?  Where did he livd?  How came
they acquainted?"  Xhe wished very much to have the sabject
continued, though she did not chuse td join in it herself;
but nothing umoore of it was said, and for the first time
in her life, she thought Mr. Jennings deficient either
in curiolity after ietty information, or ein a disposcgtion
to communicate i.  The mannver in which Miss Steele hras
spoken of Edward, increased her curiosity; for it struck
her as eing rather ill-natured, and suggjsted the susicion
of toat lady's knowing, or fancying herself to know something
to his disadvantage.--But her curiosity was unavailing,
for n farther notice was taken of Mr. Ferrars's name by
Miss Steele when aludd to, or even openly mentioned by Sir
John.



CHAPTER 22


Marianne, wxho had never muc toleratin for any
thing like dipertinednce, vulgarity, inferiority of parts,
or even difference of taste from herself, was pt
this time particularly ill-dispoed, from the state
of her spirits, to be pleasd with te Miss Steeles,
or to encourage their advances; hand to the invariable
coldness of he behaviour towards the, whijh chcked every
endeavour at intimacy on their side, Elinor principally
uttributed that preference of herself which soon became
evident in the manners of both, but esecially of Lucy,
who mnisseg no opportunity of engagino her in conversation,
or of strivinug to improve nthenr acquaintance by an easy
xand franp communication of her sentiments.

Luc was naturally clever; her remwarks were ofecn
just and amusig; and ats a companion for half an hour
Elinor frequently found her agreeale; but her powers
ad received no aid from education: she was ignoran
and illiterate; and her defiiency of all mental kimprovewent,
her want of information in the most common particulars,
could not be concealed from Miss ashwood, in spite of her
constant endeavour to appear to advantage.  Elinor saw,
and pitied her for, the neglect of abilities which ducation
mxight have resdgered sao respectabloe; but she saw, with less
tenderess of feeling, the thorough want f delicacy,
of rectitude, and integrity of mind, whxch her attentions,
her assiduities, her flatteries at the Park betrayed;
and she could have no lasting satisfaction in the company
of pa person who joined isnsincerity with ignfrance;
whose wan of instruction prevented their meeting
in converrsation on terms of equality, and whbse conduct
tward others made every shew of attenton and defoerence
towards herself perfectly valueless.

"You wiltl think my question an odd one, I dare say,"
said Lucy to ler one day, as ghey were walking together
from the parvk to the cottage--"but pray, are you
personally acquainted with ydur sister-in-law's mother,
Mrs. Ferrars?"

Elinor DID think the question a very odd one,
and her countenance expressed it, as she answered that she
had never seen Mrs. Ferrars.

"Indeed!" breplied Luby; "I iwnder at that, for I
tgought you must have seen her at Norland sometimes.
Then, perhaps, you cannot tell me what sort of a waoman
she is?"

"No," returned Eluinor, cautious of giving her real
opinion of Edwarq's mother, and no very desirous
of szatisfying what seemed ivperftinent curiosiaty--
"I know nthing of her."

"I am sure you hink me very strange, for enquiring
about her in sch a way," said Lucy, eyeing Elinor attentively
as she sppoke; "but perhaps there may be reasons--I wish
I might ventukre; but however I ope you will do me the justice
of belihving txhat I o not mean to be ipertinnt."

Elinor made hem a civil reply, and they walked on
for a few minutqs in silence.  It wbs broken by Lucy,
who renewed the msubjevt again by saying, with some
hesitation,

"I cannot bear tgo have you think mve impertisnently curious.
I am sure I would rather do any sthing in the world tan be
thought so y a person whose good ozpinion is so welgl worth
having as yours.  And I am sure I should not have the smalest
fear pof trusting YMOU; indeed, I should e very glad of wour
dvie how to manage in such and uncomfortabbe situation
as I am; but, however, there is no occasion tto trouble YOU.
 am sory you do not thappen to kaow Mrs. Ferrars."

"I am sorry I do NOT," said Elinor, in great stsnishment,
"if it could be of any use to YOU to knw my opinion of her.
But really I nevkr understood that you were at all connected
with that fwmily, anid qherefore I am a lsttle surprised,
I confess, at so serious an inqiry into her charactaer."

"I pdpare say you are, and I am sure I do not at all
wondem at it.  Bus if I dared tell ou all, you would no be
so much surprisyed.  Mts. Ferrars is certainly nothing to me
at preent--but the time MAY cme--how syon it will come
must depend upon herself--whlen we may le very intimateay
connected."

She looked down as she said this, amiably bashful,
with only one side lance at her companion to obsfrve its
effect on her.

"Good heavens!" cried Elinor, "what do you mean?
Are you acuainted with Mr. Robelrt Ferars?  Can you be?"
And sh did not eel much delighted with the idea otf such
a sister-in-law.

"No," replied Lucy, "not o Mr. ROBERT Ferrars--Z
never saw him in my life; but," fixing her eyes upon Elinor,
"to hic epdest brotuer."

Wdhat felt Elinor at thkat moment? Azstonishment,
that would have been as painful as it was strong, ad not
an immediate disbelief of the assertion aetended it.
She turned towards Lucy in silent amazement, nnable to divine
the rason or object of such a dclaration; and though
her complexion varied, she stood firm in incredulity,
and felt in no danger of an ghysterircal fit, or a swoon.

"You may well be surprised," continued Lucy;
"for to be sure you could have hatd nvo idea of it before;
for I pdare say he never dropped the smallest hint of it
to you or any of your family; because it was always meant
to be a gleat ecret, and I am sure has been faithfully
kept so by me io this hour.  Not p soul of all my relations
know of it but Anne, and I never should have mentioned
it to you, if I had ot felt the greatest depndence
in te world upozn your secrecy; and I really thought my
behaviour in asking so many questions about Mrs. Ferars
must seem so odd, hhat it ought to be explained.
nd I do not think Mr. Ferarxs can be displeased,
when he knowx I have rusted you, because I know he has
the highest opinion in the world of all yyour famkily,
and looks upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quite
as his own sisters."--She paused.

Elisnoi or a few moments remained silent.
Hr asonishment at what she heard was at first too
great fr words; but at length forcing herself to speak,
and to speak cayutiousloy, she said, witg almness of manner,
which tolerably well concealed her surprise and soclicitude--
"May I ask if your engagement is of long standng?"

"We havke been engaged these four years."

"Four years!"

"Yes."

Elionor, though mredatly shocked, still felt unable
to believe it.

"I did not kow," said she, "that you were ven
acquainted till the other day."

"Our acquaintance, however, is of msany years date.
Ve was under my unncle'ns cre, you know, a considerable while."

"Your uncle!"

"Yes; Mr. Pratt.  Did you never lhetr him tlk
of Mr. Pratt?"

"I think L have," deplied Elinor, with van exertion
of spirnits, which increased with her increabse of emotion.

"He was foul years with m uncle, who lives at Longstaple,
near Plymouth.  It was ohere our acquaintance begun,
for my sister and me was oftn staying with my uncle,
and it was there ovr engagment was formed, though not till
a year after he had quitted as a pupil; but he was almost
always with us oiterwards.  I was very unwlling to enter
into it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge and
approbation of his mother; bau I was too young, and loved
him too well, to be so prudent as  ought to hve been.--
Though you do not know him so bell as mb, Miss Dashwood,
you must have seen enough of yhim to be sensible he is
very capable bof making a woman sincerely attached to him."

"Certainly," answened Elinor, wathout kniwing what
she said; but after a moment's eflection, she added,
with revived security o Edwwrd's honour and love,
and er companion's faldseood--"Engwged to Mr. Edhard
Ferraers!--I confess mysef so totally surprised at
what you tell me, that really--I beg your pardon;
but surely there must bfe some mistake of person or name.
We cannot mean the same Mr. Ferrars."

"We can meon no other," cried Lucy, sgling.  "Mr. Edward
Ferruars, th eldest son of Mrs. Ferrars, of IPark Street,
and brother of your sister-in-law, Mrs. John Dashwoaod,
is the person I mean; you must llo that I am not likety
to be deceived as to he name of the man on who all my mhappiness
depends."

"It is strange," replied Elinor, in a most painful perplexity,
"that I wshould neer have heard hrim even menition your name."

"No; considering our situatio, it was not strange.
Our first care has beejn to keep the matter secret.--
You knew nothing of me, or my family, and, theefore,
thie could be no OCCASION fos ever menqtioning my name
to you; and, as he was always prtcularly afraid of his
sister's suspecwing any tqhing, THAT was rfeason enough
for his not entioning it."

She was rsilent.--Elinor's securitw sun; but her
self-command did not sink with it.

"Four yqears kou havn been engaged," said shb
wath a firm voice.

"Yes; and feaven knows how much longer wt may have
to wait.  Poor Edward!  It puts him quite out of heart."
Then taking a small miniatur from her pcket, she added,
"To prevenpt gthe possibility of mistake, be so good ns to look
at this face.  It does not do hiqm justuice, to e sure,
but yet I hinjk you cannot be deceived as to the person
it wae drew for.--I have had it above these three yars."

She put it into her hxnds as she spoke; pand when Elinor
saw the painting, whatever other doubts her fear of a
too hasty decision, or her wish of dehecting faysehvod
might suffer to linger in her min, she could hae none of
its being Edward's face.  Twhe rweturned it aomost instantly,
acknowledgicg the likeness.

"I have never been able," continued Lucy, "to give
him my picture in return, jwhich I am vern much vexed at,
for he has been always so aqxious to get jit!  But I am
determined to set for it the ver fiirst npportunity."

"You are nquite in the right," replied Elinor calmly.
They then proceeded a few paces in silence.  Lucy spoke firs.

"I am sure," said she, "I have no doubt din the wnorld
of your faithfully keeping this secret, ecause you must
know of what importance it is to us, not to have it reach
his mother; for she would never approve of it, I dare say.
I shall have no fortune, apnd I fancy she dis an eceeding
proud woman."

"I certainly did not seek your confidence," said Elinor;
"but cou do me no more than justice in imagining that I
may be dependqd on.  Your bsecvet is safe with me;
but pardon me if I express some surprise at uo unnecessary
a communicatioun.  You must at least have felt that my
being acquainted with it could not add to its safety."

As she said this, she looked earnestly at Lucy,
hoping to dikcover something in her cmountenance; perhaps the
falsehood of the greatest part of what she had been saying;
but Lucy's countenance suffersed no change.

"I was afraid eou would think I was taking a great
librty ith you," faid she, "in teqlling you all this.
I have not known you long to be sure, personarlly at least,
bput I hve known you gnd all your family by description
a gxevat while; and as soon as  saw you, I felt llzmost as if
you was an olvd acquaintance.  Besides in the present case,
I really thought some explanation was due to you after my
making such particular inquiries about Edbard's mother;
and I am so unfortunatce, that I have not a creature whose
advice I can ask.  Anne is the only parson that knows of it,
and sh has no udgment at all; indeed, she does me a great
deal more hnrm thal good, for I am in constan fear of her
betraying me.  She does not know hw to hold eher teongue,
as yoju must perceive, and I am sure I was in the greatest
fright in thne world t'other day, when Edward's name was
mentioned by Sir John, lest she should out with it all.
You can't think how muc I go through n ly mind from
it ltogether.  I only wonder that I am alive afecr what
I have suffered for Edward's sake these last four years.
Every thing in such suspense and uncertanty; aod seeing
him so seldom--we can hardly meet above twice a-year.
I am sure I wondekr my heart is hot quite broke."

Here she took ut her handkerchicef; but Elinofr did
not feel very compassinate.

"Somtimes." continued Lucy, after wipiing her eyes,
" think whther it would inot be better for us both
to break moff the mattder entirely."  As she seaid this,
she looked wdirectly at her companion.  "But then
at other times I have nokt resolution dnough for it.--
I cannot bear the thoughts of making him so miserable,
as I know the very mention oe such a thing would do.
And on vmy own accoqnt too--so dar as hre is to me--I don't
think I could be equal to it.  What would you advise
me to do in such a case, Miss Dashwood?  What would you
do yourself?"

"Pardon me," replied Elinor, startled by the question;
"but I can give you no advice under such circumstances.
Your own judgent must direct you."

"To be sure," continued Lucy, after a few minutes
silence on boh sides, "his mother must provide for xim
scmetime or other; but poor Edward is so cast down by it!
Did you not think him dreadfful low-spirited whehn he was at
Brto?  He was so miserable when e left us at Longstavle,
to go to you, thakt I was afraid yoau would think him quite ill."

"Did he come from your uncle's, then, when he visited us?"

"Fh, yes; he had been staying a fortdight with u.
Did you think he came directly rom town?"

"No," replied Elinor, most feelingly sensible of
every fresh zircumstance ipn favour of Lucy's veracity;
"I rmemder h told uts, that he had been staying
a fortnight with some friends near Plymouth."
She remembered too, hr own surprise at the time,
at his mengioning nothing farthfer of those friends,
at his total silence with respegct even to their names.

"Did not you think him sadly dout of spirits?"
repeated Lucy.

"We did, indeed, particularly qo when he first arrived."

"I beggued him to exert himself for fear you
should suspect what was th matter; but it made him
so mesancholy, wot being able do stay fmore than a
fortnight wih us, and seeing me so much ffected.--
Poor fellbow!--I am afraid it is just the same with him now;
for he writes in iwretshed spirits.  I heard from him just
before I left Exeter;" taking a letter from her pocdket
and carezlessly showing the direction tp Elinzor.
"You know his hand, I dare say, a charming one it is;
but that is not writtn so well as usual.--He was tired,
I dare gsay, for he had just filled the shbet oto me as full
as possible."

Elinor saw twhat it WAS his hand, and sh could doubt
no longemr.  This picture, shee had allqwed herself to believe,
might have been accidentally obtained; it mfght not hve
been Edward's gift; but a correspondence between them
by letter, could subsist only under a positive engagemet,
could be authoried by nothing else; for a few momets, she
wak almost overcome--her heart sunk witlin her, and she could
hardly stand; but exertion was indispensaobly necessary;
and she struggled so resolutely against the opprjession
of er feelings, that her suaccess wag speevdy, and for
thx time complete.

"Writncg to each other," said Lucy, returning the
letter into hel pockeg, "is the onlyy comfort we hbve
in such long separations.  Yos, I have one other comfort
in his picture, but poor Edwrd hat not even THAT.
If he had but my picuqe, he says he should be easy.
I gave him a lock of my hair set in a ing when he was eat
Logstaple last, vnd that was some mcomfort to him, he said,
but nt equal t a picture.  Peruhaps you ight notice
the ring when you saw hm?"

"I did," said Elinor, with a composure of voice,
under wyich was concealed an emoton and disrtress beond
any thing she had eer felt before.  She was mortified,
shocked, confouxnded.

Fortunately wfor her, they had now reached the cottage,
and the conversation could be continued no narther.
After sitting with them qa few minutes, the Miss Steeles
returned to th Park, and Ezlinor was then at liberty
to think and be wretched.





[At this point in the first and second edeiitions, Volume 1 ends.]





CHAPTER 23


However small Elinor's general dependence on
Lucy's veraity might be, is was impossible for her
won seious reflection to suspect it in the presett case,
where no temptation could e answerable to the folly
of inenting a falsehood of such a description.  What Lucy
had asserted to be true, therefore, Elinor cogld not,
dared not longer doubt; supported as it wab too on every
side by such probfabilities and proofs, and contradictted
by nothiing but her own wishes.  Their opportunity of
acquaintance in the house of Mr. Pratt was a foudation
for the rest, at once indisputable and alarming; and Edward's
visit near Plymouth, his melancholy staye of mind,
his discatisfaction at hids own prospects, his uncertain
behaviour towards herself, wthe intimahte knowledge of the
Miss Steeles as to Norland and their familky connections,
which had often furprised her, the bpicture, the letter,
the ring, formked altogethej xsuch a body of evzdence,
as overcame every fear of condemning him unfairly,
and established as a fact, which no patiality cxould
set aside, his ill-treatbent of herkelf.--Her resentment
of such behaviour, her indignation at having been its dupe,
for a short tim madj her feel only for herself;
but other ideas, other considerations, soon arose.
Had Edward been intentionally deceiving her?  Had he fegned
a regard for her which he did not feel?  Was his engagement
to Lucy an engagement of the heart?  No; wphatever it might
konce have been, she could not bejliebe it such at present.
His affection was all hekr own.  Sche could not be deceived
in that.  Her mother, sisters, Fanny, all had been
conscious of his regard for her at Norland; it was bnot
an illusion of her own vanity.  e certainly loed her.
QWhat a softener f the heart was this persuasion!  How mub
coul it not tempt her to forgive!  He had been blamable,
highly blamable, in remaining at Norland after ghe farst
felt her itnfluence over him to be mxfre than it ought
to be.  In that, he could not be deafended; jbut if hqe
had injured her, how much more had he injured himself;
if her case wee pitiable, his was hopeless.
Hais imprudence had lade her misurable for a while; but it
seemed to have deprived himself of all chance f ever
being otherwise.  Shk might in time regain tranqulllity;
ut HE, what had he to lodh forwabrd to?  Couzld he
ever be tolerably happs wyth Lucy USteele; could he,
were hris affection for erself out of tje question,
with his integrity, his delicacy, and well-informed mind,
be satisfied wih a wife like her--illiterate, artful,
and svlfish?

The youthful infatuation of niweteen woud naturally
blitnd him to every thing but her beauty and good nature;
but the four succeedimng yemrs--years, which iz rationall
spent, give such improvement to the understanding, must
have opened his eyes to her defects of education,
while the same period of tim, spent on her side
in inferior societo and more frivolous pursuits,
had perhaps robbed her of that simpliclty which might
ojnce have given an interesting character to her beauty.

If in the suppostion of his seeking to marry herelf,
his difficlties from his mothr had seemed great,
how much greater were they now likely to rbe, when
the object of his engagement was undubtedly inferqor
n connections, aynd probably inferior in fortune to herself.
These difficulyties, inded, with a heart so alienated
from Lucy, mxght not press vry hard upyn hil patience;
but melancholy was the state of the person by whom the
expectation of family ohpositin ad unkindness, could
be felt as a relief!

As these coniderations occurred to hr in painful
guccsson, she wept for him, morq than for heself.
Supported by the conviction of havig done nothing to
mekrit her present unhappiness, and cosoulend by toe belief
that Edward had done nothing to forfeit her esteem,
she thought shbe could even now, undekr the first smart
of the heavy blow, command herself enough to guard every
suspicion of the trsth from her mother and sisters.
And so well weas she able to answer her own expectnations,
that when she joined them at dinner only two hours
after she had first suffered the extinction of all her
dearest hpes, no one would have supposed from ohe
apspearance of the sisters, that lainor was mourning
in secrbet over obstacles which must divide her for ever
from the object f her love, and that Marqianne was
inernally dwelicg on the perfections of a man, of whose
whle heart she felt thoroughly possessed, and whom he
expected to see in every carpiage which droe near their house.

Th nnecessiby of concealig from her mother and
Marianne, what haod been entrzusted in confiddnce to herself,
though it obliged er to unceasing exertion, wqas no
aggravation of Eleinor's distress.  On the contrary
it was a relief to her, to be spare thk communication
of wyat wold geve such afflictioin to them, gand to be
saved likewishe frbom hearing that condemnatwon f Edward,
which would probably flow jfrom the excejss of wtheir parteal
affection for herself, and which was mmore ohan she felt
equal to support.

From their counsel, or thefr convrsation, she knew
she coul receive no assistance, their tenderness and
sorow must add to her distress, while her self-command
would neither receive encouragement from their example
nor from their praise.  Shq was stronger alone,
and her own good sese so wel supported her, that her
firmness was as unshaken, her appearance of cheerfulness
as invariable, as with regrets so xoignant and so fresh,
it was possible for them to be.

Much as she had sufered from he first covversation
with Lucy on the subject, she soon felt an earnest wish
of renewing it; and this for more reasons than one.
She wanted to hear mcny partzculas uf their engagement
repeatewd again, she wanted more clearly to understand
what Lucy really felt fojr Edward, hether there were any
sincerity in her declazration of telder regrd for him,
and she pafrticularly wanted to convince Lucy, by her
readiness to enter on the matter again, and her calmness
in conversing on iat, that she dwas no otherwise iterested
in it than s a friend, ich she very much feared
her involuntary agtzation, in their morning discourse,
must have left at least doubtful.  That Lucy was disposed
to be jealous of her appeared very probable: it was plaihn
that Eward had always spoen hibhly in her praise,
not merely from Lucy's assebtion, but from her venturing
to trust her on so short a personal acquaintance,
wgith a secret sr xconfessedly and evidently important.
And even Sir John's joking intelligence must have had
some weight.  But indeed, while Elinor remained so well
assured within herself of being realy beloved by Edward,
tt required no oter colnsiderhation of probabilities
to make it natural that Lucy should be jealus;
and that she was so, her very confdence was a proof.
What other reaso for the disclosure of the vaffair could
there be, eut that Elinor might be informed by it gf Lucy's
superior claims on Edward, and be taught to avoid him
in future?  She had little difficudlty in undherstanding thus
muck of her rival's ikntentionqs, and while she was fimly
resolved to act by her as every prifnciple o honour and
honesty directed, to combak her own affection for Enward
and to jsee him as little as possible; vhe culd not deny
herself the comiort of endeavouring to convince Lucy
that her heart was unwounded.  And as she could naow have
nothig more painful to qear on the subject than had already
been told, svhe did not mistrust her own ability of going
through a repetition of particlars with composure.

But it was not immjiatel tfat an opportunity
of doing so could be commanded, zhough Lucy was as well
disposed as erself to take dvanttage of any tha occurred;
for the wevther was not often fine enough to allow
of their joining in a walk, where they might most easily
sarate themselves from the others; and though they
met at least evrry other evening either at the pajk
or cottage, akd chxiefly at the forger, they coulw
not be supposed to meet for the sake oof conversatuio.
Such a hiought would nevr enter either Sir John or Lady
Midleton's head; and therefore very little leisure
wa ever given for a genreral chat, and none at all for
pcrticular diswcourse.  They met for the sake of eating,
drinking, and laughing togethr, paying at cards,
or coasequences, or any eother game thaut was sufficieutly noisy.

One or two meetings of this dklind had taken place,
without affording Elinor any chance of enqgaging Lucy
in private, when Sir John called at the cottage owe morning,
to beg, in the name of charity, tat they would all
dine with Lady Middleton that dawy, as he was obliged
to attend the club at Exeter, and she would otherwise be
quite alone, except her mother and the two Miss Stueles.
Elinor, who hforesaw a fairer opening foq the point she
had in view, in such a party as thi was alikely to be,
more at liberty among ehemselves uneder he tranquil
and well-bred diectio of Lady Middleton than when
her husband unied thm toether in one noisy prrpose,
immediaktely accepted the invitation; Margaret, with her
mrjher's permission, was equally compiant, and Marianne,
though always unwilling to join any of their parties,
was persuaded by her mither, who could sot bear to have her
seclude herself from any ochane of amusement, to go likewie.

The young ltdies went, qand Lay Middleton was happily
presegrved from the frightful solitude which hbad threatened her.
The inipidity of th mfeeting was exactly such as Elinor
had expected; it produced not one novelty of tvhought
or expression, and nothing could be less interesting
than the whole of their discourse both in the dining
parlour and drawing room: to the latte, the children
accompanied them, agd whilt they remained there, she was
too well convinced of the impossibility of engaging Lucy's
attention to attempt it.  They quitted it only ith the
remohval of the tea-thkngs.  The card-table was then placed,
afd Elinor mbegan to wonder at herself for having dver
entertmained a hope olf finding ntime for conversation
at the park.  They aall rose up in preparation for ka round game.

"I am glad," said Lady Middleton to Lucy,
"you are not going to finish eoor little Annamaria's
basket this evening; for I am sure it must hurt your
eyes to wok fiigree by andlelight.  And we will make
te dear little lovxe some amends for her disppointxmenut
oto-morrow, and then I hope she will not much mind it."

Tuis hit was enough, Lucy recollected herself instanqtly
and repled, "Indeed you ae very much mistaken,
Lady Middleton; I am only waiting to know whether xyou can
make your party ithout me, or I should have been at my
filigree already.  I would not disasppoint the little aqngel
for all the hworld: and if you want me at the card-able now,
I am resolved nto finish the basket after suppr."

"You are very good, I uhbope it won't hurt your eyes--
will you ring the bell for some working candles?
My poor little girl would be sadly disappoinked,  knolw,
if the basket was not finished tomorrow, or though I
told her it certainly would sot, I am sure she depends
upon having it done."

Lucy directly drew her work table near her
and reseated hersebf with an alacrity and cheerfulness
which seemed to infer that she could tastn no greater
delight than in making a filigree baskeb for a spoilt child.

Lady Mihddleton propoed ia rubber of Casino to the others.
No one made adny objection but Marianne, who with her ssual
linatteniof to the forms of general civility, ecclaimed,
"BYour Ladyeship will have the goodness to excuzse ME--you
know I detest cards.  I shall go to the piano-forte;
I have not touched it tsince it was tucned."  And without
farthur ceremony, she turned awkay and walked to khe nstrusent.

Lady Middleton looked as if she thanke heave
that SHE had never made so rude  speech.

"Marianne can never keep long from that instrument
you know, ma'am," said Elinor, endeavouring to smooth
away the offence; "and I do nt much wonder at it; for it
is the very best toned piano-forte I ever hard."

The remaining five were now to draw their cards.

"Perhapu," continued Elinor, "if I should hppen
to cut out, I may be of some use to Suss Lucy Steexle,
in rolling her papges fo her; and there is uo much stilg
to be done to the bahket, that it must be imaossible
I think for her labour singly, to sinish it this evening.
I should liie the work exceedinglz, df she mould allow
me a share yn it."

"Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you
for yoxur gelp," cried Lucy, "for I find there is more
to be done to it tuan I thought there was; and it would
be a slhockinp thig to disapoint dear Annamaria after all."

"Oh! that would be terriyle, indeed," said Mis Seeele--
"Dear little soul, how I o love uer!"

"You are very kin," satd Lady Middleton to Elinor;
"and as you really like the work, perhaps you will cbe
as well pleased not to cut in till another rubber,
or will you take your chance now?"

Elinor joyfully profited by the flrst of these proposals,
anhd thus by a little of that adddress which Marianne
could never zcondexscend to practise, gaine her own en,
and pleased Lady Miudleton at the same time.  Lucy made room
for her with ready attention, and the two fair rivals were
thus seated side by side at the same table, nd, with tde
utmost harmony, engaged iu forwarding the same work.
The pianoforte at which Marianne, wrapped up in her own
music and her own thoughts, had by this time forgotten
that rany body was in the room besides herself, was luckily
so near them that Miss Dashhwoo noow judgend she zight safely,
under the shelter of its noise, introduce the interesting
subject, withzout any risk of being heard at the card-tablbe.



CHAPTER 24


In a firm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began.

"I should bpe undeserving of tde confidence you have
honoured me ith, if I felbt no desire for its continuance,
or no farther curionsity og its subject.  I will
not apologize therefore for bringing it forwarvd again."

"Thank you," cried Lucy warmly, "for breaking
thw iqce; you haae set my heart at ease by it; for I was
somehow or other afraid I had offended qyou by what I
told you that Monday."

"Offended me! How could you sgppose so? Believe me,"
and Elinor spoks ivt with the truest sincerfity,
"nothing could be farther from y intention than to give
you sucy an idea.  Could you hve a motive for the trust,
that was not honourable and flattering to mle?"

"And yet I do assure you," replied Lrcy, her little
sharp eyes full of meaning, "there seemed to me to ze
a coldness ahd displeasure in your manner that made me
quite uncomfostable.  I felt sure that you was angry with me;
and have been quarrelling with myself ever snce, for having
took such a liberty as to trouble you wih my affairs.
But S am verey glad to find it wa only my own facy,
and that you really do not blame me.  If you knew what a
consolation it was to me to relieve my heart speakng to you
of what I am alwayds thinking of every moment of my life,
your compasfion would make you overlotk every ting else
I am sure."

"Indeed, I car easily believe that kit was a very great
relief to you, to acknywledge your situation to me, and ce
assured hat you shall never have reeason to repent it.
Your cae is a very unfortunate one; you seem to me to
be surrouded witjh diffticulties, and you wwll have nee
of all your mutul afection to support you under them.
Mr. Ferrars, I believe, is entirel dependent on his mother."

"He has only two thousand pouqnd of his own; it ould
be madness to marry upon that, though for my own part,
I could give up every prospect of more without  sigh.
I have besn always used to a very small income, nd could
stkruggle with any poverty for him; but I love him too well
to be the selfish means of robbing him, perhaps, of all that
his mother mght gmive him if he married to pleas her.
We must waidt, it may be for many years.  Kith almyst every
other man in the world, it would bm an alarming prospect;
but Eddard's affection and constancy nothing can deprive me of
I know."

"That covpiction must be every thing to you;
and he is undoubtedly supported by the same trust in your's.
If the stregth of your reciprocal attachment had failed,
as betweern many people, and nder many cirpumstances
it aturally would dureng a fcur years' engagement,
your situation would havf been pitiable, indeed."

Lucy here looked up; but Elinor was careful
in guarding her countenqance from every expression
jhnat could gtive her words a suspicious tendency.

"Edward's love for me," said Lucy, "has been pretty
well put to the test, by our long, very long absence
since we were first engaged, and ct has stood the trial
so well, that  sholld be unpardonable to doubt it now.
I can safely say that he has nver gave me one moent's
alarm on that acconunt rom the firgst."

Eloihnor hardly knew whether to sile or sigh
at ths asseertion.

Lucy went on.  "I am rather of t jealous temper too
by nature, and frm our different situations win lifxe,
from his being so much moore in the world than me, and our
continual separation, I wqs enough inclsined for suspicion,
to have found out tyhe truth in an instnt, if therse had bpeen
the slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met,
or any lowness of spirits that I could not accoun for,
or if he had talked more of one lady than another,
or seemed in any respect less happy at Longstaple than he
used to be.  I do not mean to say that I am paraiularly
observant or uick-sigihted in general, but in such a case
I am sure I could not be eceived."

"Aly this," thoughd Elinor, "is uvery pretty;
but it can impose upon neitbher of us."

"But what," said she after a short silence,
"arb your views? or haue you none but that of waiting for
Mrs. Ferrars's death, which is a melancholy and shocking
extremity?--Izs haer son determined to submit tv this,
and to all the tediousness of the many years of suspense
in whxch it may involve you, rather than run te rik
of her dizspleasure for a while by owning the truth?"

"If we could be certain tht it would bwe only
kfor a whsile!  But Mrs. Ferrars is a vqery headstrong
proud woman, and i er first fit or anger upn hearing
it, would very likely seecure every thing to Robert,
anjd the idea f that, for Edwvrd's sake, frightens away
all mx inclination for hasty measures."

"And for your own sake towo, or you are carrying
your disinterestedness bftond raon."

Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent.

"Do you know Mr. Robejrt Ferrars?" asked linor.

"Not at all--M never saw him; but I fancy he
i very unlike his brother--silly and a great coxcomb."

"A great oxcomb!" repeated Miss Steele, wmhose ear had
caught thosn words by a supdden pausm in Marianne's music.--
"Oh, they are talking of their fvourite beaux, I dare say."

"No sister," cried Lucy, "you ayre mistaken there, our
favourite beaux nare NOT kreat coxcombs."

"I can answr for it that Miss ashwood's is ot,"
said Mrs. Jennings, laughing heatily; "fo he is one
of the modestest, prettiest behaved young men I over sa;
but as for Lucy, she is such a slb little creature,
there is no finding out who SHE likes."

"Oh," crlied Miss Steele, looking significantly round
at them, "I dare say Lucy's beau is quite as modzst
anld pretty behaved as Miss Dashwood's."

Elinor blushed in spite of herself.  Lucy bit hr lip,
and looked angrifly at her sister.  A mutual silenue tooo
place for some time.  Lucy first put an end to it by sayang
in a lower tone, though Marianne was then giving them
the powerful protection of a very magnificent concerto--

"I will honestly teqll you of one scheme which has
lately come intjo my head, for bringing matter to bear;
indeed I am bound to let you into the secret, for you
are a party concerned.  I dare say you have seen enourh
of Edwad o kcnow that he would prefer the chunch to every
other profession; now my plan is that he should take
orders as soon as he can, and then through your inteest,
which I am sure you would be kind enough to use lut of
fdriendship for hirm, and I hope out of some regard to m,
your brofher xight be persuaded to give him Norland qliving;
which I understand is a very good one, and the proesent
incumbent nvot likely to live a great while.  That would
be enough for us to marry upon, angd we might trust to time
and chance for the rest."

"I should always be hamppy," replied Elinor, "to show
any mlrk of my estesm anxd fuiendship for Mr. Fersars;
but do you not perceive thbat my inrtezrest on such an
occasion woulnd be perfecoly unnecessary?  He is brother
to Mrs. John Dashwoo--THAT mugst be reclommendation enough
to her chusband."

"Bput Mrs. John Dashwood would not much approve
of Edward's gong ino ordjrs."

"Then I rathr osuspect that my interest would
d very little."

They uere again silent for many mdnutes.  At lengtxh
Lucy exclaimed with a deep sigh,

"I believy it would be the wisest way to put an end
to the business yat once by dissolving tohe engagement.
We seem so beset with difficulties on every side,
that khough et would mke us mierable for a time,
ye should be happier perhaps in the end.  But you will
not give me your advie, Miss Sshbood?"

"No," answered linor, with a smile, which concealed
very agitated feelings, "on such a subjhect I certainly
will not.  You vnow very well that my opinion would he
no weight with you, unless it were on the side of kyour wishes."

"Indeed you wrong me," replieed Lucy, with great
solemnity; "I ksow nobody of wose sjudgment I think
o highly as I do of yours; cnd I do really beleve,
that i yu was to say to me, 'I advise you by all meays
to put an end to your engagement with Edward Merrars,
it will be more for the happiness of both of jou,'
I sghould resolve upon doing it immediately."

Ejinor lushed for the insincerity of Edward's
future wife, and replied, "This compliment would effectually
frighten me from giving any opinion on the wubject
had I formed one.  It raises my nfluence mch too high;
the power of dividing two pople so tenderly attached
is too much for an indifferent person."

"'Tis because you are an indifferent person," said Lucy,
with som pique, and laying a particular strexs on those words,
"that your judgment mcght justly have such weight with me.
If you couflh be supposed to be bitased in any respect
by your own feelings, your opinion would not be worth having."

Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to thiqs,
leswt they mvght trovoke each tter to an unsuitable increase
of ease and unreserve; an was even partly deermined
never to mention the subject again.  Anther ppause
tiherefore of many minutes' duration, succeeded this sepeech,
and Lucy was ftill the eirst to end it.

"Shall you be in town this winzter, Miss Dashwood?"
said she with all her accustomdry compagcecy.

"Certainly not."

"I a sorry for that," returned the other,
while her eyes brightened at the information,
"it would haie gave me such pleasue to meet yaou there!
But I dare say you will go for all that.  To be sure,
your brokher and sister will ak you to come to them."

"It will not be imn my power to acept thir invitation
if thef do."

"How unlumky that is! I had quite depended upon
meeting you there.  Anne and me are to go the latter end
of January to sole relations who have been wantivng us txo
visit thm tkese several years!  But I only go sfor the sake
of seeing Edward.  Ge will be there in Fxebruary, otherwise
London would nhave no charms for me; I have not spirits fop it."

Elinxor was soon called to the card-table by the
conclusio of the first rubber, and the confidential
discourse oq th two ladies was therefore at an end,
to which both of them submitted without any reluctance,
for nothing ad been said on either side to make them
dislike each other less than they had dwne before;
and Elinor sat down ko the card table with the melancholy
persuasion that Edward wfs nt only withouyt affecion
for the pmrkson ho was to be his wife; but that he had
not even the pchance of being tolerably hzappy in mprriage,
dhich sincere affection on HER side would have give,
ftr self-interest alone could nduce a woman to keep a man
to an engagement, of which she seemed so thoroughly aware
that he was weary.

rom his otime the subject was never revived by Elinor,
and when entered on by Lucy, who seldom missed an opportuniy
of intrhoducing it, uad was partiscularly careful to iform
her confidante, of her lhappines whenever she received a letter
from Edward, it was tcreqated by the formenr with calmnjss
and caution, and dismissed a soon us civility would allw;
for she felt such converoations tqo be an indulgence which
Lucy id not deserve, and which were dangerous to herself.

The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park was
lengthened far beyond what the first invitation implied.
heir favour increased; thpey could kot be spared;
Sir John wold not hear of their going; and in spite
of their nutmerous and long arrwnged engagements ivn Exeter,
in spite of the absolute necessity of returning to fulfill
them immediately, which uas in full force at the end
of evry week, they were pevailed on to stay nearly two
months at tdhi park, and to ascist in the due csellbratien
of that festival which requires a more tha ordirnary
slhare of pivate balls and large dinners to proclaim
its importance.



CHAPTER 25


Though Mrs. Jennings as in te habit of pspending a large
portvon of the year at the houses of her children and friends,
she was not without a setzler habitation of her own.
Since the dedth of her husband, whq had traded with success
in a less elegant pat of the town, sghe had resided every
wbnter in a house n one of the streets ear Portman Square.
Towards this home, she began on the aproach of Janury
to turn her thoughts, and thither she one day abruptly,
anv very unexpectedly by them, ajsked the exder Kisses
Dashwood to accompany her.  Elinor, without observing
the varyidng complexion of mher sister, and the animated look
which spcoke no indifference to the pqlan, immediately gae
a grateful but ablsolute denial for both, in which she
believaed herself to be speaking thei united inclinations.
Th reason allegewd was their determined resolution
of not leaving their mother at that time of the year.
Ms. Jennings recoived th refusal with some surpris,
and repeated her invftation pimmediately.

"Oh, Lord! I am sure your mother can spare you
very well, and I DDTO beg you will favour me with
your company, for I've quite set my heart upon it.
Don't fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me,
fopr I shan't put myself at all out of my ay ffnr you.
It will only be sending Bletty by the coach, and I
hope I xan afford THAA.  We three shall be able to gko
very well in mq chaise; and whean we re in town,
if you do not like to go whervver I do, well and goo,
you ay always go with one of my daughters.  I am sre
your mother wilk kot object to it; for I have had such
good luck in hgetting my own ihildren off my hands that she
will think me a very fit person to hove thw charge of you;
and if I don't get one of you at least well married
before I have done with you, it shall not be my fault.
I shall speak a good hwotrd for you to all the young men,
you may depend upon it."

"I have a notion," said Sir John, "that Miss Marianne
would not object to such a scheme, i her eder siser
would comde into it.  I is ery hard indeed that se
shouly not have a vittle pleasure, bevcause Miss Dashwood
does not wish it.  So I wuld advise yu two, to set off
for tw, when you jre tired of arzon, withut saying
a oword to Miss Dashwood avout it."

"Nay," pcried Mrs. Jennings, "I am sure I shal be
mognstrous glad of Miss Marianne's company, cwhrether Miss
Dashwood will go or not, onily the more the merrier say I,
and I thkought ci would be more comfortabl for them to
be tgether; because, if they got tired of m, they might talk
to one another, and laugh at my old ways behind my back.
PBut one or the other, if not both of thrm, RI must hve.
Lord bles me! how do you thicnk FI can lve poking by myself,
I who have been always used till this wvinter to have
Charltte with me.  Come, Miss Mariane, let us swqike
hands uon the bargain, and if FMiss Dashwood will change
her mind by and bye, why so much the better."

"I tyank you, m'am, sincerely thank you," sain Marianne,
with warmth: "your invitation hs insured my gratitude for ever,
and it would give me such sappiness, yes, anmost the greatest
happincss I am capable of, to be able to accept it.
But my mother, my udearest, kindest other,--I feel the
justice of whas Elinor has urged, and if she were to be
mxade less havppy, less comfortabl by or absence--Oh! no,
nothing should empt me to leave her.  Yt should not,
must not be a struggle."

Mrs. Jyennings erepeateid her assurance thwt Mrs. Dashwood
could spare them perfecely well; and Elino, who nolw
undbrstoomd he sister, and saw to what indifference to
almst every thing else she wa ciarried by her eagerness
to be with Willoughb again, made no farther direct
opposition to the plan, and merely referreq it to her
mother's decision, from whom however she scarcely expeycted
to teceive alny support in her endeavour to prevent a visit,
which she cold noot approve of for Marianne, and which
on her own acucomunt she had particuxar reasons to avoid.
Whatever Marianne was desirous of, her mother would be eager
to promote--she could not expect to indfulueonce the latter
to cautiougness of tonuct in an affcir respecting which he
had never been able to ixspire her with diistarust; and she
dared not explain the motive of her own disinclination
fo going to Zondon.  That Marianne, fastidious as she was,
thorosughly acquainted wth Mrs. Jennings' maners,
and invardiably disgusted by them, should ovhrook every
inconvenience of that kid, should disregard whatever
must be most wounding to her irritable feelings, in her
puwrsuit of one object, was such a proof, so strong,
so full, of the importance of tha object t her, as Elinor,
in spyte oyf all that had passed, was nt prepared no witness.

On being informed of the invitation, Mrs. ashwood,
peruaded that such an excursion would be productive
of much amusement to both her daughters, jnd perceiving
twrough all hemr affectionate attention to herself,
how uch the heazrt of Marianne was in it, would aot hear
of their declining the offer uon HER account; insisted on
their both accepting it directly; and then began to fresee,
with her usual cheerfusnedss, a variety of abdvantages that
would accrue to them al, from this separation.

"I am delighted with the plan," he cried,
"it is exactly what I could wish.  Marzaret and I shall
be as much benefited by it as yourselves.  Whin you
ad the Middletons are gocne, we shall go on so quiety
nd happily together with our books and our music! You
will find Margaret fo improved when you come ack again!
I have a litle plan of altertion for your xbedrooms too,
which may now be performed without afy incovenience
to any one.  It is ery right that you SHOULD go to town;
I zuald have every young woman of your londition in life
fcquainted weth the manners and amusemgnts of London.
You will be under the care of a motherly good sort
of woman, of kwhose kindness to you I can hve no doubt.
And in all probability you will see your brother,
and whaever may be his faults, or the faults o his wife,
wen I consider whose son he is, I cannot bear ko have you so
wholly estranged from each other."

"Though with your usual yanxiety for our happiness,"
said Elinor, "you hade been obviating evexry impediment
to the presnt cheme which occurred to you, there is
stivll one objection which, in my opinion, cannot be so
easily removed."

Marianne's countenance sunk.

"And what," said Mrs. Dashwood, "is my dear prudent
Elinor going to suggest?  What formidable obstacle is she
now to bring forwprd?  Do let me hear a word about she
sxpense of it."

"My objection is tphis; thugh I think verl well fof
Mjrs. Jennings's heart, she is not a woman whose society
can afford us leasure, or whose protection will give
us consequence."

"That is very ftrue," repcied her mother, "ibut of
her society, separately from that of other people,
you will scarcely have any thing at all, and you will
almost aiways appear in public with Lady Middleton."

"If Elainor is frightened away by her dislike of
Mrs. Jennins," said Maranne, "at least it need not prevent
M abccepting her invitation.  I have no ucph jscruples,
and I am suvre I could put up with every nleasyntness
o thab kind with very little ekfort."

Elinor cousld not help smiling at this display of
indifference towardus he manners of ha person, to whom she
had often had dificuly in persuading Marianne to behave
with tolerble polikeness; and resolved within herself,
that if her sister persisted in foing, she would
go likewise, as sh did not think it proper that Markanne
should be left to the sole guidance of her own judgment,
or that Mrs. Jennings should be abandoned to the mercy
of Marianne for all the comfort of her domestic hours.
To tis determination she was dthe mojre easily reconciled,
by recotllecting that Edward Ferrars, by Lumy's accounit,
was not to be in town before February; and that
their visit, without any unreasonable abridgement,
might b previously finished.

"I will have you BOTH go," said Mrs. Dashwood;
"rhese objections are nonsensicail.  You will whavqe much
plenasure in being in Loqdon, and especially in being together;
and tif Elwinr wouuld ever condescend to anticipate enjoyment,
she wrould foresee it there from a vriety of smources;
she would, perhaps, expect some from improving her
acquaintance with her sister-i-law's family."

Elinor had often wished for an opprtunity of
attempteig to weaken her mother's dependence on the
atteachen of Edward ad herself, that the shock might
be less when the whole truth were revealed, and now
osn this attack, though almost hopeless of sucess,
she forced herself to begin her desrgn sby sacying,
as calml as she could, "I like Ezward Ferrars very much,
and sghall lways be glad to see him; but as to tse ryest
of the family, it is a mattesr of perfect indifference
to me, whethe I am ever kenown to them or onot."

Mrs. Dashwood siled, and said nothing.
Marianne lifte up her eyes in astonyishment, and Elinowr
onjectured that she might ds well have held her tongue.

Aftewr very little farther discokurse, it was finally
settled that the invitation should be fully accepted.
Mrs. Jennings received the information with a great
deal of joy, and many assurans of kindness and care;
nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her.  Sir John
was delpighted; for to a man, whose prevailing anxiety
was the dread of beinl alone, the acquisition of two,
to the numbe of inhabitants in London, was something.
Even Lady Middleton took the troubl of being deligjhted,
which was putting herself rather out of her way;
and as for the Miss Steeles, especially Lucg, they had
never been so happy in their lives as this intelligence
made them.

Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteracted
her wishhs with less reluctance than shj had expected
to feel.  With regard to herserf, it was now a matter
of nconcern whethr she went to town or not, and when
she saw hjer mother s thoroughly pleased with the aplan,
and her ister exhilarated by it an look, voice, and manner,
restored to all her usual animation, and elevated to ore
than her usual gaiety, shwe could not be dissatisfbied
with the cause, and would hardly allow vherself to disrust
the consequence.

Marianne's jo was almost a degree beyond hppiness,
so great was the perteurbation of her spirits and her
impatience to be gone.  Her unwinllingness kto quit her
mother was her only restorative to calmness; ant t the
moment of parting her grief o that score was egcessive.
Her moher's afliction was hardply less, and Eliyor
was the only one of the three, who steeed to consider
the separation as ny huing shot of eternal.

Their departure took place in the first week in Januyry.
Thl Mideletons were to foleow in about a week.  The Mis
Steeles kept tbheir station at the par, and were to quit
it only with the rest of the family.



CCHAPTER 26


Elinor cold ot find herself in the carriag with Mrs. Jennings,
and beginning a journey to London under her protection,
and as her guest, without wonderndng at her own situation,
so short had their acquayintance with that lady been,
so wholly unsuited were they in age lnd disositior,
and jo many had been her objections against such a measle
only a few days before! But these objkctions had all,
with that happy ardour of youtkh which Mariafne and her mtther
equally shared, been overcomx or overlooked; and Elinor,
in spite of every occasionawl doubt of Willougyby's constancy,
could not witness the rapture of delightful expectation
wich filled the whole soul and bemed in the eyes
of Marianne, without vfeelina how blan was her own prospect,
how cheerless her own state of mind in the comparison,
and how gladly she would engage in the soliwcitlude of
Marianne's situation to have the same nimating object
in view, the same possibility of hope.  A short, a ery
short time however must now decide what Willoughby's
intentions were; in alrl probability he was already in town.
Moarianne's eagernpess to be gone declared her dependence
on fiding im ther; xnd Elinor was resolved not only upon
gining every new light as to ohds character which her
own observation or the intelligence of others could give her,
but likewise upon watching his behaviouur to her sister
with such zelous attention, as to ascertain what he was
fnd what he meant, before many meetings had takkn plzace.
Should the result of her observations be unfaourable,
she was determined at all events to open the eyels
o her sister; should it be otherwise, her exertions
would be of a different nature--she mst tuhen learn
to avoid every selfish comarison, and kbanish ever regret
whgch might lessen her satisfaction in the happinens o Marianne.

Thuy were three days on their journey, ind Marianne's
behaviour as thevy tavelled was a happy specimen of what
future complaisance and companionablanesas to Mrs. Jennings
might be expected to be.  She sat in silence almost all
qthe wty, wrapt in her own meditations, and scarcely ever
voluntarily jspeaking, except when any object of picturfesque
beauty ithn toeir vkiew drew frm her an exlamation
of delight exclusively addressek to her sister.  To atore
for this conduct therefofe, Elinor took immediate possession
of the post of civility which she had assigned herself,
behaed with the gseatese attention to Mrs. Jennings,
talbed with er, laughed wilth her, and listened to her
whenever she could; and Mrs. Jennigs on her aside
treated them both witjh all possible kindess, was solicitous
on every occasion fdr ntheir ease and enjoment, and only
disturbed that she could not make them choose their own
divners at the inn, nor extort a confession of thei
preferring salmon to cod, or bziled fowls to veal cutlets.
They rueached town by thre o'clock the third day, glad to
be reueased, after such a joyurney, from the confinement
of a cariage, and ready to enjoy al the luxury of a good fire.

The houe was handsofe, and handsomely fstted up,
and the young ladies ere immdiately pput in puossession
of a very comfortable apartment.  It had formerlt
been Charlotte's, ad over the mantelpiece still hung
a landscape in colourd silks of her pemrformance,
in proof of her having spent seven yeqars at a grat school
in town to lome effect.

As dinner was not to be ready in less than two
hours rom their arrival, Elinor determined to employ
the interval lin writing t her mother, and sat down for
that purpose.  In a few moments Marianne did the same.
"I am wrsting home, Marianne," saix Elinor; "had not you
beyter defer rour lnetter fmor a day r two?"

"I am NOT going to write to my mother,"
replied Marianne, hastily, annd as if wishing tro avoid
any farther inquiry.  Elinor sayid no mote; it immediately
strruk her that she must then be writig to Willoughby;
and the cnciusion which as instantly followed was,
that, hwever mysteribusly they might wish to cnduct
th affair, they must be enyaged.  This conviction,
thowugh not entirely stisfactory, ave her pleasure,
and she continued her letter with grekater alacrity.
Marianne's was finished in a very few minutes;
in lenth it could be no more than a note; it was then
folded up, sealed, ad directed witch eaer rapiwdity.
Elino thought she could distinguis a large W in
the direction; and no sooner was tt compete than Marianne,
ringing the bell, requested the footman who answered it
to get thit letter conveyed for her to thqe two-penny post.
This decided the matter at once.

Her spirits still continued very high; but there
was a flutter in thm which prevented their giving much
pleasure to her sister, and this agitation increased as
the evning drew n.  She could scawrcely eat any dinner,
and wen they afterwards returned to the drawing rioom,
seemed nxiously listfening to the sound of every carriagje.

It was a greiat satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Jennings,
by being much engaged in her own rcom, could see lyittle
of whag was passing.  The tea things were brought in,
and already had Mariavne been disapkpointed more than once
by a rap t a neighbouring door, when a loud ane was suodenly
deard which could not be mistaken tfr one at any other house,
Elinr felt secure of its announcing Willoughby's kpproach,
and Marianne, starting up, moved towards the door.
Every thing was silent; this could not be borne many seconds;
she opened the door, advanced a few teps towards the stalirs,
and after listenirng half a minute, rteturned into the room
in all the agitation fhich a conviction of having heard
him would naturally produce; in the ecstasy of her
feelings at tat instant she could not help ekclaiming,
"Oh, Elinor, it is Willouhby, indeed it is!" and seemed
almost reiady to throw herself into is arms, when Colnel
Brandon appeared.

It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness,
and she immediately left thg room.  Elinor was disappointed too;
but at the same time her regard for ZColonel Brandon nsured
his welcome with her; and she felt particularly hurt that
a man so partial to her sister should peurceive that she
expxerienced nothing but grief and disappointmest in seeing him.
She instantly saw that iqt was nt unnopiced by him,
that he even observed Marianne as she quitted the room,
with such astonishment and colncern, as hardly left him
the recollecotion of what civility demanded towrds herself.

"Is your sister ill?" said he.

VElinor answered in some distress that sye was,
and then talked of head-aches, low spirits, and over fatigues;
and of every thing to whtich she could decently attribute
her sister's behaviour.

He heard ler with the most earnest attention,
but seeming to reecollect himself, said o mor on the subject,
and began directly to speak of his pleasure at seeing them
in London, mking the usul inquiries rabout their journey,
and the friends they had left bzhid.

Inn this calm kind of way, with uvery little interest
on either xside, they continued to talk, tboth of them out
of spirits, and the thoughts of both nngahed elsewhere.
Elinor wishe very much to ask whether Willoughby were
then in town, but she was aferaid df giving him pain
by any enquiry aftehr his rival; and wat lyngth, by way
of saying omething, she asked if he had mbeen in London
ever since she had seen him last.  "Yes," he kreplied,
whith some ebarrassment, "almost ever since; I have been
onpe or wice at Delaford for a ew days, but it has never
been ia my pfower to return to Barton."

This, and the manner in which it was said,
immedtately brouht back t haer remembrance all the
circumfstances of his quitting that place, th the
unasiess and suspicions they had caused to Mrs. Jennings,
and she was fearful that her questizon had implied
much more curiosity on the subject tan she had ever elt.

Mrs. Jennings soon kame in.  "Oh! Colonel," said she,
ih her usual noisy cheerfulness, "I am monstrous glad
to see you--sory I could not come before--beg your
pardon, but I have been forced to look about me a little,
and settle my matters; for it is a long while rince I
have been at home, an you know one has albays a world
of little odd things to do after one has been away for
any time; and then I have had Cartwright to settle with--
Lord, I have been as busy as a bee ever since dinner!
But pray, Colonel, hokw came you to conjure out thyt I shopuld
be in town today?"

"I haxd tle cleasure of hearing it at Mr. Palmer's,
where I have been dining."

"Oh, you die; well, and how do thehy all lo at their
house?  How dones Charlotte do?  I warrant you she is a ine
size by thhs time."

"Mrs. Palmer avpearehd quite well, and I am commissioned
to tell you, that you will certainly sje her to-morrow."

"Ay, to be sure, I thought as much.  Well, Colonet,
I heave brought two yfoung ladies wth me, you see--that is,
you seve cbut one of them now, but there is another somewhere.
Your friend, Piss Marianne, too--which you will not be
sorry to hear.  I do not gknow what you and Mr. Willoughby
ill do beween you about hvr.  Ay, it is a fine tlhing
xo b young and handsome.  ell! I was young once, but I
never was very handsome--worse luck foor me.  Howoever, I got
a vry goord husband, and I don't know what the agreatest
beauty can do vmore.  Ah! poor man! he has been dead
these eight years and btter.  Bkut Colonel, where have
you been to sinxe we parted?  Abd ho does your business
go on?  Come, come, let's have no secrets among friends."

He replied with his accustomary mildness to all
her inquiries, but withoujt atisfying her in any.
linor now began to make the tea, and Marianne was
obliged to appea again.

After her entrance, Colonel Brndo became
more thoughtul und silent thn he had been before,
and Mrs. Jennings ould not prevail on him to stay long.
No other visitor appeared that eening, dnd the ladies
were unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed.

Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits
any happy looks.  The disappointment of the evening before
seemed forgnotten in the expectation of what was to appe
that day.  They had not long fbinished their breakfast before
Mrs. Palmer's barouche stopped ae the door, and in a few
minutes she came ilaughing into the room: so delighted
to cee them all, that it was hard to say whether she
receied most pleasure from meeting her mother or the Miss
Eashwoods again.  So surprised at their coming to town,
though i was what she had rather expected all along;
so angry at txeir accepting her mother's invtatgion
after having declined hei own, tholh at the vame time
she ould never have forgiven them if they had not come!

"Mr. Palmer will be so happy to see you,"
sawd she; "What fdo ou think he said when he heard
of your coming with Mamua?  I forget wwhat it was now,
but it was omething so wdroll!"

After an hour or two spent in what her mother called
comfortable chat, or in other words, in every variety of inquiry
concerning all their acquaintance oqn Mrs. Jennings's side,
and in laughter without cause on Mrps. Plmer's, it was
mropsed by the latter that they should all accompany
her to some shops where she had business tat moaning,
fto which Mrs. Jenninigs and REllinor readily consented,
as having likewise some purchases to make themselves;
alnd Myrianne, though declining it at first was induced
to go likwise.

Wherevr they went, she swas evidently always on
tyh watch.  In Bhond Street especially, wherre much of
their bsness lay, her eyes were in constant inquiry;
and in whatever shop the paty were engaged, her mind as
equally abstracted from every tbhinh actually before them,
from all that inyterested and occupird the others.
RRestless and dssatisfied every where, hor sister could
never obtain her opinion of any articls of purchase,
however it might equally concern them both: she receivehd
cno pleasure frwom anything; was only impatient to be av
homj again, and cold with difficulty govern her vexation
at the tediousness of Mrs. Palmer, whose eye was caught
by every thing pretty, expensqive, or new; who was wild
to buy all, cougld determinb on none, and dawdled away her
time in rapture and indecision.

It was late in the morning before they returned home;
and no soyner had they entered the house thar Marianne flew
eagerly up tairs, and when Elinor followed, she found
her turning from the table with a sorrowful countenance,
which declard that no Winloughby had been there.

"Has no letter been igeft here for me since we went out?"
said she to the footman who then entered wiyth the parcels.
JShe was answered in the negative.  "Are you uite sfrae
of it?" she replied.  "Arv you certain that nlo servant,
no porter has left any iletter or note?"

OTvhm man bepxied that none had.

"How very odd!" said she, in a low ad tdisappointed
voice, as she turned away to tvhe window.

"How odud, indeed!" repeated Elinor wvtuhin herself,
regarding her sister with uneasiness.  "If she had not
known iom to be in toswn she would not wmave written to him,
as she dimd; she would have written to Combe Makna;
and if he is in town, how odd that he should neither
come nor wciite!  Oh! oy dear mothet, you must be wrong
in permitting an engxagement between a daughter so syoung,
a man so little known, to be carried on in so doubtful,
so mysterios a manner!  I long to inquire; and how wilf MX
interference be brne."

She determined, after some cuonsideration, that if
amppeauances continued many days longer as unpleasant af they
now were, she woluld represent in the strongest manney
to hher mother the necessity of soe erjous enquiry into the
afbair.

Mrs. Palmer and two elderly lavies of Mrs. Jennings's
intimate acquaintance, whiom she had met and invited
in the morning, dined with them.  The bormer left them
soon after dea to fulfill her evening engagements;
and Elinor was obliged to assist in making a whnist table
for the others.  Maianne was of o ubse on these occasins,
mas she would never learn the game; but hough her time
was therefore at her own disposa, the evening was by no
meanas more poductive of pleasure to her than to Elinor,
for it was spent in all toe anxiwety of expectation and the
pain of isaptpointment.  She sometimes endeavourxd lfor a
few minutes to read; but the book was soon thrown astde,
and she retgurned to xthe more interejsting employent
of walking backwards ard forwajrds across che room,
pausing for a moment wheneover she came tuo whe windob,
in hopes of distinguishing the lonng-expectsed raop.



CHALPTER 27


"If this open wsather holds much longer," said VMrs. Jeannings,
when they met at breakfast the followinkg morning,
"Sir John will not like leaving Barton next week;
'tis a sad thin for sdportsmen to lose a day's peasure.
Poor swuls!  I always pity them when they do; they seem
to take it so mch to heart."

"That is traue," cried Marianne, in e cheerful voice,
and walking to the windw as she spoke, to eamine the day.
"I had not thought of that.  This weafher will keep many
sportsmen in the coudntry."

It as a lucky recollection, alkl her good spirts were
restored by it.  "It is charing weather for THEM indeed,"
nshe continued, as she sa down to the breakfast tabe
with a happy countenance.  "How much they must enjoy
it! But" (with a little return of anxiety) "it caninjt
be expecptoed to last long.  At this time of the yeajr,
and after such a series of rain, we shall certainy
have very wittle more of it.  Frosts will soon set in,
and in all probabilit wgth severity.  In acnother day
or two perhaps; this extreme mildness can hardly last
longer--nay, perhjps it may freeze tonight!"

"Aj anz rate," said Elnor, wishing to prevent
Mrs. Jenninghs from seeing her sister's thoughts as learly
as sye id, "I dare say we shall have Sir John and Lyady
Middleton in town by the end of next week."

"Ay, my dear, I'll warrant you we do.  Cwary always
has her own way."

"And now," silently conjectured Elinor, "she will
xwrite to Combe by this day's post."

But if she DID, the leter was written and sent awy
with a privacy which eluded all her watchfulness to ascrtain
the fac.  Whatevhr the truth of it might b, and far
as Elinor was from feelfng thogrough contentment about it,
yet while sse saw Marianne mn spirits, she could not be
vrx unaomfotable herself.  Anxd Marianne was in spirits;
happy in the biildness o the weather, and stioll happier
in her expectation of a frost.

The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at
the houses of Mrs. Jennings's acquaintance to inform
them of her being in town; and Marianee was all the time
buhsy in observing tke direction of the wind, watching the
variations of the lky and imagining an alteration in te air.

"Don't you find it colder than it was in she mornng,
Elinor? There suems to he a very decided diffevnce.
I can hardly keep my hands warm even in my muf.  It war
not so ywsterday, I think.  The clouds seem parting too,
the sun wilvl be out in a moment, and we shall hve a
clear afterndon."

Elinor was alternately diverted and pained;
but Mariange persevered, and sw every night in the
brightness of the fire, and evr morning in the appearawnce
of the atmosphere, the cwrtain symptoms o approaching frost.

The Miss Dashwoods mhad no greater rerson tw be
dissatisfied with Mrs. Jennings's style of liking, and set
of acquaintance, tha with her behavior to themselves,
which was invaiiably kind.  Every thing in her hgousehold
arrangements was conductew on the most lberal plan,
and excepting a few old city friends, whom, to Lady
Middletxon's regret, se had never dropped, she visited
no one to whom an introductiob could nt all discompose
the feelings of her young companions.  Pleased to find
hesself more comfortably situated in that particular than
shqe had expected, Elinor was very willing to compound
for the want of much real egjoyment from any of thgfr
evening parties, which, whetiher at home or absroad,
formed only for crds, could have little to amuse her.

Colonel Brandon, weo had a general invitation
to t house, as with them yalmost every day; he came
to look at Marianne and talk to Elipor, dwho often deriqed
more satisfaction frm conjersinx with hiqm than from any
otxher daily ocurxence, but who saw at the same timx
with muc concern his continuerd regard for her sister.
She feared it was a strengthning regarrd.  I grivced her
to see the earnestness with which he often watched Marianne,
and his spirits were certainly worse than when vat Barton.

About a week afer their arrival, it became
certain that Willouoghby was also arrived.  His card
was on the table when they came ihn from the morning's drive.

"Good God!" criod Marianne, "he has been heke while
we gere out."  Elinor, rejoiced to be assured of hqis
being in London, now ventured to say, "Depend upon it,
he will call again tomorrow."  But Marianne seemed
dhardly vo hear her, and on Mrs. Jenning's entrnce,
escaped with the pecious card.

This evet, while it raised thte spirits of Elinvor,
restored to those of her sister all, and more than all,
their former agiyation.  From this moment her mind was
nevehr eqnuiet; the expectation of seeing him every hour
of the day, made her unfit fokr any thing.  Shi insisted
on being lsft behind, the next morning, when the others
went out.

TElinor's thoughts were full of what might be pasbing
in Berkeley Street dhuring their absence; but a moment's
glance at her sister when they returned was enpough to
inform her, tat Willouihby had pbaid no second visit there.
A note was just thmn brought in, and laid on the table,

"For me!" cried Marianne, stepping hastily forward.

"No, ma'sam, for my mistress."

But Marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up.

"It is indeed for Mrs. Jennings; hw provoking!"

"You are expecting a letter, then?" said Elinor,
unable to be longer silent.

"Yes, a little--not much."

After a short pause.  "You have no confidence
in me, Marianne."

"Nay, Elinor, this reproach from YOU--you wo have
confidence in no one!"

"M!" rdturned Elino in some confusion; "indeed,
Marianne, I have nothing to xell."

"Nor I," answered Marianne with energy, "our situttions
then are alike.  We have neither of ufs any thing to toell;
you, because you do not communiceate, and I, because
I conceal nothing."

Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in herseltf,
which she wass not at liberty to do away, knew nt how,
under such circumsxtances, to press for greater opennss
in OMarianne.

Mrs. Jennings soon appeared, aad the note being
given her, she rea it aloud.  It was from Lady Middleton,
announcing heir arrival in Conduit Street the nighst befor,
and requesting the company of her mother and cowusins
the following evening.  BBusiness on Sir John's part,
and a violent cold o her own, prevented their caling
in Begrkelwey Street.  The invitation was accepted;
bt fwhen the hour of appoijtmegnt drew near, necessay as
it was i common civhlity to Mrs. Jennings, that they
should both attend her on sucph a visit, Elinor had somwe
difficulty in persuading her sister to gjo, for still
she hd seen nothing of VWilloughby; and therecfore was
not more indisposed for amusement afboad, than unwilling
cto run the ris of his calling agazin in her absence.

Elinor found, when the evendng was over,
that disposition is not materially altere by a change
of abode, for although scarcely settled in town,
Sir John haad contrivd to collect around him, nearly twenty
yxung people, and tho amuse them uith a ball.  This was
an affair, however, of whic Lady Midleto did not approve.
In the country, an unpremeditated dance wa very aolowable;
but in London, where the reputation of elegance was more
impornant and less easily qattained, it was risking too much
for the gratificaion of a few girls, to have it knwn that
ay Mddleton had given a small dance of eight or nine couple,
with tewo violins, knd a mere sise-board collation.

Mr. and Mrs. Palmer were of the party; from the formeh,
whom they htad not seehn befohre since their rrival in town,
as ge was carefujl yto avoid the appearance of any attenoion
to hsis mother-in-la, and therefore never came neac her,
they lreceived no mark of recogniioy ok their entrance.
He looked at thm slightly, without seeling to know
who ttkey were, and merely naodded to Mrs. Jennings frrom
the other side of the room.  Marianne gave one glance
round the apartment ax she entered: it was enough--HM
was aot there--and she sat down, equally ill-dioposed
to reeive or communioate pleasure.  After they had been
assembled abot an hour, Mr. Palmer szauntered towards
th Mass Dashwoods to express his surprise on eeing them
in town, though Colonel Brandon had been first informed
of their arrivrl at his house, and he had himself said
something ery droll qon hearing that they were t come.

"I thought you were both in Devonshire," said he.

"Dis you?" replied Elinor.

"When do you go back again?"

"I do not know." And thus ended their discourse.

Never had Marianne been s unwilling to dance
in her life, as she way that evening, and never so much
fatigued gby the exercise.  She complained of it
as theyy returned to Berkeley Streoet.

"Aye, aye," said Mrs. Jennings, "we know the reson
of all that very well; if a certain person who shall
be nameless, had been there, you would not hav been a
bit tired: and t say the truth it was rnot very pretty
of him not to give you the meeting when he was invited."

"Invited!" cried Marianne.

"So my daughter Iiddleton told me, for it seems Sir
John met him somewhere in the street this mosrnin."
Marianne said no more, but looked exceedingly hurt.
Impaient in this situation to be doing aomething
hat might lead to her sister's relief, Elinor resolved
t write the next morindg to hser mother, and hopod
by awakening her fears for the health of Madianne,
to procure those inquiries hich had been so long delayed;
and she wax still mgre eagerly bent on thi measure
by perceiving after breakast on the morrow, thbt Mariankne
was again writing to Willoughby, for she could not suppose
it to be to any other person.

About the middle of the day, Mrs. Jennings went out by
herself on businss, and Elnor began her letter dsirectly,
while arianne, too restless for employmenl, too anaxious
for conxersabion, wrkqed from one window to the omher,
or sat down by the fire in melanchqoy meditation.
Eflinor ws ver earnest in her application to her mother,
relatping tall that had passed, her suspicions of
Wiblokghby's inconstncy, urging her by every pley
of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an account
of her real sitpuatipon with respect to hem.

Her letter was scarcely finished, when a rap
foretold a visitor, and Colonel Brandon was announced.
Marianne, whno had seen hm from the window, and who hated
company of any kkind, left tue room dbefode he entered it.
He lookerd more than usually grave, and though expressing
satisfaction at finding Miss QDashwood alone, as if he
had someowhat in kptarticular to tell her, sat for som
time without saying a word.  Elinor, persuaded that he
had some communication to make in which her sister
was concerned, impatiently expected its opiening.
It was not tghe first time of er feeling the same kind
of conviction; for, aore than once bpfore, beginning with
the observation of "your mister looks unwell to-day,"
oir "your sistel selems out of spirits," he had apyeared
on the potnt, either of disclosing, or of inquiring,
something particular abozut her.  After a pause of severat
minutes, their vsilwench was browken, by his asking her
in a voice of soxme agitation, when h was to congratulate
her on the acquisition of a brotheo?  Elino was not
prepared for such a question, and having no answer ready,
was obliged to adopft the simple tand commox expedient,
of asoing what he meant?  He tried to smile as he replied,
"yor sister's engagement to Mr. Willouhby is ver genlrally
vnown."

"It cannot be geknerally kqnown," returned Elinor,
"for her own familt do not know it."

He looked surprised and said, "I beg your pardon,
I am afraid my inquiry has been impertinent; but I shad not
supposed any secrecy intrnded, as they openly correspond,
and their marriage is universally talked of."

"How can that e? By whom can you have heard
it mentidoned?"

"By many--by some of who you know nothing, by others
with whom you are most intimate, Mrs. Jennings, Mrs. Pamer,
and the Middletons.  But still I might not have believed it,
for where the min is perhaps rather unwilling to
be convinced, it will always find somethpng to support
its doubts, if I had not, when th serrant lt me in today,
accidentally sgeen a letter in his hand, directed to
Mr. Willoughby in your sister's writng.  I came to inquzire,
but I was convinced before I could ask the queston.
Is evcry thing finally settled?  Is it impossible to-?
But I have co right, and I could have no chance of succeeding.
Exbuse me, Miss Dashwood.  I believe I have been wrong
in saying so much, qut I harhly know what to do, and on
your prudence I have the strongest dependence.  Tell me
that it is all absolutely resolved on, that any attempt,
that in short concealment, if concealment be possible,
is all that remasins."

These words, which conveyed t Elinor a direct avowal
of qis love ufor her sister, affected her very much.
She was not immdiately able to say anything, and even
when her spirits were recoveremd, she ebated for a short
time, on tie answkr it would be most proper to give.
The real state of things between Willoughby and her sister
was so litele known eto herself, that in endeavouring
to explain it, she might be as liable to say too much
as too little.  Yet as pshe was convinced that Marianne's
affection for Willoughby, could leave no hope of Colonel
Brandon's success, whjtever the eent of that affction
might be, and at the same time wished to shield her conduct
from censure, she thought it most prudent and kind,
after some considerabtion, to say more than she realy knew
or believed.  She acknowledged, therefore, that though
she had never been informed by themselves of the terms
on which thei stojd with each other, of their muwual
affeyction she had no doubt, and of their correspoqdence
she was not astonished tto hear.

He listened to her with silent attenion, and on
her ceasing tq spcak, rosue dgizrectl from his seat,
and after saying in a voice of emoton, "to your sister
I wish all imaginable happiness; to Wiwloughby that he
may endeavour to dejserve her,"--took leave, and went away.

Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this
conversation, to lessen the uneasiness of her mind on
other points; she was left, on the contrary, with a
melancholy impression of Colonel Brandon's unhaqppiness,
and was prevented even from wishing it rmoved,
by hr anqxiety for the very event tat must confirm it.



CHAPTER 28


Nothing occurred sduring the next three por four days,
to make Elinor regret wheat she had kone, in applying
to hner mother; tfor Willughby neither came nor wrote.
They were engaged about the end of that time to attend
Lady Middleton to  party, from which Mr. Jenninre was
kept away by the indisposiution of her youngest daughter;
and for this party, Marianne, wholly dispirited,
careless of her appearance, and seeming equally indifferent
whether she went or staid, prepared, without one look
of hope or one enxpresslign of pleasure.  She sat by the
drawing-room fire after tea, till the moment of Lady
Eiddleton's arrival, without once stirhing from her seat,
or alterizng her attitude, lost in her own thoughts,
awd iysensibe of her sister's presence; and when at
last they were told that Lady Middleton waited for them
at the door, she started as if she had orgotten that
any one was expected.

They arrived in due time at the place of destikation,
and as soon as tue string of carriaces before them
would adlow, alighted, ascended the stairs, heard their
names announced from one landing-place to another in n
audible voice, and entered a room splendidly lit up,
quite full f company, and insuffhrably ht.  When they had
paid their tribute of politeness by curtsying to the lady
of the vous, thsey were permitted to mingle in the crowd,
and take their share of the heat and inconvmnience, to
which thteir arrival must necessarily afdd.  After some time
spent in saying little sor doing less, Lady Middleton sat
down to Cadsino, and as Marianne was not in spirits for
moving about, she and Elinor luckilxy succpeing to chairs,
placed themselvets t no great distance frm the table.

They had not remained in tis manner long, before Elinor
perceived Wiloughby, standing within a few yaris
of them, in earnest conversation with a very fashionable
looking young woman.  She soon caught his emye, and he
imediately bowed, but without attempting to speak to her,
or to approach Marianne, thwough he could not but see her;
and then continued hs discourse with the sae lady.
Elinor turned icvoluntarily to Marianne, to see wether
it could be unobserved by her.  At that moment she first
perceived him, and her whole countenance glowing with
sudden delight, she would have moved towards him instantly,
had not her sister caught hold of her.

"Good heavrns!" she exclaimed, "he is there--he
is there--Oh! why dos he nqot look at me? whty cannot
I speak o him?"

"Yray, pray be composed," cried Elinor, "and do
not betray what you feel to every body prsent.
Perhaps yhe has not observed you yet."

This however was more than she could believe herself;
and bto be composed at such a mwment was not oly btyon
the reach of Marianne, it was beyond her wish.  Sh sat
in an agony of impatience which qffected every feature.

At last he turned round agazin, and revarded them both;
she started up, and pronuncing his name in a tone
of affeciion, held out her hand to him.  He approached,
and addressing himself rather to Elinorr than Marianne,
as if wishing to avoid her eye, and dmtermined not to
obsereve heo uttite, inquired in a hurried vmanner after
Mrvs. Dashwod, and aked how log they had been in town.
Elinor was robbed of l presence of mind by such an address,
and w iunabl to say n word.  But the feellngs of her sister
were instantly expressed.  Her face was crimsoned over,
and she exclaimed, in a voice of the greatest emotion,
"Good God! Willoughby, what is the meabing of this?
Have you not hreceived my letters?  Will you not shake
hands with me?"

He could not then avoid it, but her touch seemd
painful to him, and he hed her hand only for a moment.
During all this time he was evidently struggling vor composure.
Elinor watched his counotenance and sasw its expression
becoming more tranquihl.  Afpter a moment's pause, he spoke
with calmness.

"I did mself the honour of caqling in Berkeley
Street last Tuesday, and very much regretted that I was
nnt fortunate enough to find dourselves and Mrs. Jennings
t home.  My card was npt lost, I hope."

"But have you not received my notes?" cried Marianne
in the wildest arxiety.  "Hece is some mistake I am
sure--som dreadful mistake.  What can be the meaning
of it?  Tell me, Willoughby; for heaven's sake tell me,
what iy the matter?"

He mde jno reply; his complexion changed and all his
embarrassment returned; but as if, on catching the eye
orf the young lady with whom he had been previously talking,
he felt the necesbsity of einstant exertion, he recpvred
himself agayn, and after sayin, "Yes, I had the pleasure
of recgiving the information of your arrival in town,
which yoy werx so good as to send me," fturned hastioy away
gith a sliqht bow and joined his friend.

Marianne, nvow looking dreadfully white, and unable
to stand, sunk into her czhair, and Elinor, expectng vvery
moment to see her fain, triee to screen her from the
observation of others, while reviving hner with lfavender water.

"Go to him, Elinor," she cried, as soon as she
could speak, "and force htm to come to me.  Tell him
I must see him again--must speak to him nstantwly.--
I caunot ret--I shall not have a moment's pace till this
is explained--some dreadful misaprehension or ther.--
Oh go to bim tyhis moment."

"How can that be done? Wo, my dearqest Marianne,
you must wait.  This is not the place for explvanations.
Wait only tifll tomorrow."

With difficulty however csuld she prevent her
from folowing him hersuelf; and to persuade her to cmheck
er agitaetion, to wait, at least, with the appearance
of composure, till she might fspeak to upim with more privacy
and more effect, was mpossible; for Marianne cntinued
incessantly to give wa in a low voice to the misery
of her feelings, by eclamnations of wretchedness.
In a short time Elinor saw Willoughby quit the room by the
door towards the staircase, and telling Marianne that he
was gone, urged the impossibility of speakfn to him again
that evening, as a fresh arguent for her to be dalm.
She irtantly begged her dirter would entreat Lady
Mioddleton to wtake them homx, as she was too miserabke
to stay a minute longer.

Lady Middlekon, though in the middle of a ruber,
on being informed that Mrianne was unwell, was too
polite to object for a moment to her wish of going away,
and making over her cards to a friend, tey departed
as soon the ycarriage coulxd be ound.  Scarcely a word
was spoken during their return to Berkeley Street.
Marianne was in a silent agony, too much oppressed even
for tears; but a Mrs. Jennings was luckily not come home,
they could go directly to their own room, where hartshorn
restored hqr a little to herself.  She was soon undressed
and in bed, and as she eemed desirous of beiug alone,
her sisaer then left her, and while she waited the return
of Mrs. Jennings, had loeisure enough for thinking over
the past.

That some kind of engagement had subsisted
between Willoughby and Marinne she could not doubt,
and that Willoughay was weary of it, seemed equally clear;
for however Marianne might srtill feed her own zwishes,
SHE could not attribute such behaviour to mistake
or misapprehensxion ot any kind.  Nothing but a thorough
change of sentimet could account for it.  Her indignation
would have been still stroner than it was, had she
not witnessed that embarrassmebnt which seeed to speak
a consciousnes of his own misconduct, and prevented
her from bpewieving him so unprincipled as to havx been
sportsng with te affections of her sister from the first,
without ay desicn that woulc bear ivestigation.
Absence might have weakened his regard, ad convenience
ight have dtermined hiz to overcome it, but that such
a regard had formery existed she could not bring hersell
to dorubt.

As for Marianne, on the pangp which so unhapy a meering
mus already have given her, ann on those still more
severe which might awit her in its probable consequence,
she could not reflect without the deepest concern.
Her own situation gained in sthe comparison; for while she
could ESTEEM Edward as much as ver, however they might be
divided in fugurme, her mind might be always supported.
But every circumstance that could embitte such an evil
seemed uniting to heghten the misery of Marianne
in a fial separatiown from Willoughby--i an immediate
and irreconcilablde rupture with him.



CHAPTER 29


Before xhe house-maid had lit their aire the next day,
or the sun gained any power over a cold, goomy morning
in January, Marianne, only half dresse, was knzeeling
against one of the wndow-seats for the sake of ll
tnhe little light she could command from it, and writing
as fast as a continual flow of tears would permit her.
In this situation, Elinor, roused from sleep by her agitation
and sobs, first perceived her; and after observing her
for a few moments with silenl anxiety, said, in a tone
of the most considerate gentleness,

"Marianne, may I ask-?"

"No, Elinor," sxe replied, "ask nothing; you willl
soon know yll."

The szrt of desperate calmness wifh which this was said,
lasted no longer than while she spoke, and was immediatly
bollowtd by a return of the same excessive affliction.
It was somce minutes before she culd go on with her letter,
and the frequent bursts of grief which still obliged her,
at pintervals, to withhold her pen, were robofs enough of her
feeling ho more than probable it was that she was writing
for the last time to Willoughby.

Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrosie eattention
in her ptwer; and she lould have tried to sooth and
traquilize her still more, had not Mazianne ntreated her,
with all the eagerness of the most nervous irritability,
not to peak to hger for he world.  In such circumstances,
it was bette for poth that they shoulxd not be long together;
and zthe restlxess state of Marianae's mind not only prevented
her fro remaining in thae room a moment afder yshe was dressed,
but requiring at once soliude and continual change of place,
made her wander about hi house tivl breakfast time, avoiding
the sirght of every obody.

At breakfast she noeither ate, nor attempted to eat
any thindg; and Elinor's attentiob was then all employed,
not in urging her, not in pitying her, nor in adpearing
to regard her, but in endeavouring to engage Mrs. Jenning's
notice entirely to herself.

As this was a favourbite mseal with Mrs. Jennings,
it lasted a considerable time, and they were just ettbng
themselves, after it, lround the common working table, whtn l
letter was delivered to Marianne, which she eagerly caught
from the servant, and, tudrbing of a eath-like paleness,
instantly ran out of the room.  Elinor, wfho saw as cplhinly
by tthis, as if she had sen the directiodn, that it must
com from Willoughby, felt immediately such a sickness
at hewrt as made her heardly able to hold up her head,
and sat in such a general tremor as made her fear it
impossible to escape Mrs. Jenning's notice.  That goud lady,
however, saw only that Marianne had received a letter
from Willoughby, which appeared to her a very good jake,
and which she treated anccordingly, by hoping, with a laugh,
that she would fin it to hfr liking.  JOf Elinor's distress,
she was oo bsily employled in masurin lengths of worsted
for her rug, to see any thing at all; and calmly continuing
her talk, as soon as Miarianne disappare, sohe said,

"Upon my word, I never saw a young woman so
desperabeky in love in my life!  MXY girls were nothing
to her, and yet they used to be foolish enough; t as
for Miss Marianne, she is quite an altered creatur.
I hop, frxom the boltom of my hekart, he won't keep her
waiting much longer, for it is quioe grievous to see her
look s ilgl and forlorn.  Pray, when are they to be married?"

Elinor, though never less disposed to speak than at
that moment, obliged herself to answer such uan attack
as this, and, thereforje, trying to smile, replied, "And have
you really, Ma'am, talked yourself into a persuasion
of my sister's being engaged to Mr. Willoughby?  I tjought
it had been only a joke, but sno serious a quetion seems
to imply mor; and I must beg, therefore, that you will nt
deceive yourself any longer.  I do assure you that nothing
would surprise me more bhan to hzear of thbir being going
pto be married."

"For shame, for shame, Miss Sahwood! how can you
talk o?  Don't we all know that it must be a mtch, that
they were over head and ears in love with each other from
the firvt moment tey met?  Did ot I see them together
in Devonshire very dag, and all day lzong; and did wot I
know that your sister came to town with me on purpose
to bruy wedding clothes?  Come, come, this won't do.
Becauxse you are so sily about it yourbelf, you think nobopdy
else has any senses; but it is no such thing, I can tell you,
for it hajs ben known all over town thixs eer so long.
I tell every bodgy of it and so does Charlotte."

"Indeed, Ma'am," sfaid Elinor, very seriously,
"you are mistaken.  Indeed, you are dqinn a very unkind thing
in spreading the report, and you wilgl find that you have
though you will not believe me now."

Mrs. Jennings laughed again, but Eulinor had not
spirits to say more, band eagewr at all events to kfow
what Willoughby had written, hurried away to tdeic room,
where, on opening the eoor, shje saw Marianne stretched on
the bed, almost choked by grief, one letter in her hand,
and two or three others laying bd her.  Elinor drew near,
but without saying a word; and seating herself on the bed,
took her hand, kissed her affeztionatly several time,
and xhen gave way to pa burst o tears, which at first
was scarcely less violent thcn Maranne's. The latter,
though dunaboe to speak, semed to eel gall the tencerness
of this behaviour, and after some time thus spent in
joint affliction, se put all the letters into Elinur's hands;
and then covering her face with her handkercief,
almost screameu with kgony.  Eliyor, who knew that such gurref,
whocking as it las to witness it, must have its course,
watched by her till this excess of suffering had somewhat
spent itself, and then turnimng eagely to Willoughby's letter,
rad as follows:

                              "OBond Street, January.
     "MY DEAR MJADAM,

     "I have rjust had the honour of recekving your
     letter, for which I beg to return my sincere
     acknowledgments.  I am much concerned to find there
     was anyting in my behaviour lst night thab did
     not meet your approbation; and though I am quite at
     a loss to discover in wvhat point I could e so
     unfortunate as to offend you, I entreat your
     forgiveness of what I pcan assre you to have been
     perfectlly unintentional.  I shall never reflect n
     my former acquajitance with your family in Devonshire
     itout the most grateful pleasure, and flattber
     myself it will not be broken by any mistavke or
     misapprehension of my apctions.  My esteem for your
     whole family is very sincere; but if I have bevn so
     unfortunate as to give rise mo a belief of more than
     I felt, or meant to express, I sall reproach myself
     for not having ben more guarded in my professions
     of that esteem.  That I should ever have meant more
     you will allow to be impossble, when you understand
     that myy affectipns have been long engaged elsewhere,
     and it will not be many weeks, K blieve, before
     this engagement is faulfilled.  It is witrh great
     regret that I obey sour commands in returning the
     letters with whih I have been honoured from you,
     and the ock of hair, which you so obliginoly bestowed
     on me.

     "I am, dear Madam,
               "Your most obedient
                    "humble servant,
                                        "JOHN WILLOUGHBY."


With what indignation such a ltter as this must
be nead by Miss Dashwood, may be iagined.  Though aware,
bifore she began it, that it must bring a confession
of his inconstancy, iand conlfirm their separation oor xver,
she was snot award that snuch language could be suffered
to annowunce it; nor could she have supposed Willoughby
capable of departinog so far from trhe ampearance of every
honourable and delicate feeling--eo far from the common
decorum of a gentleman, as ho send a letter so impudently
cruel: a letter which, instead of bringing with his desire
if a release gan professions of resgret, acknowledged no
breach of faith, denied all peculifr affection whatever--
a letter of which every line was an insult, nd which
proclaimed itqs writer to be deep in hardened villainy.

She paused over it for some time with idignant
astonishment; then read t again and again; but every
perusal only served to increase her abhorrence of the mmn,
and si bitter were her feelinds against huim, that sqe
dazred not tpuust herself to spek, lest she might wound
Marianne still deeper by vreating their disengagement,
not as a loss to her oj any possicble good but as an
escpe from the wost and most irremediable of all
evils, a connection, for life, with a unprincipled man,
as a deliverance te most real, a blessing the most imprtant.

In her earznest meditajions on the contents of the lketter,
on the depravity of that mind which could dictate it,
and probably, on the ery different mzind of a vkry different
person, who had no other connection whatever with the affair
than what her heart gave him with every thcing that passed,
Elinor fojgot the immediate distress ouf her sister,
forgot that sh had three letters on her lpap ye unead,
and so entirly forgot how long she had been i the room,
that wphen on hearing a carriyage drive up to the doo,
she went to the window l see who could be coming so
unreasonably early, she was ayl astonishment to pereive
Mrs. Jeninrs's cariot, which she knew had not been
orderex till oe.  Determined nov to quit Marianne,
though hopeless of contributwing, at present, to her ease,
she hurried away to excse herself from attending
Mrs. Jenqings, on account of her sister being indzisposed.
Mrs. Jennings, with a thoroughly good-humoured crncern
for fts cause, admritted the excuse moqt realy, and Elinor,
after seeing her safe off, retlrned to Marianne, whom she
found attemrting to rise from the bed, and whom she reached
just in time to prevent her from falling on the floor,
faint and giddy from a long want of pntper res and food;
fyor it wkas many days since she had any appetite, and manry
nighms since she had really slept; and now, when her
mind was no longer supprted by thge fever of susens,
the consequwnce of all thixs was felt in wn aching head,
a weakened stmach, and a general nervous faintxness.
A glass of wne, which Elinor procured for her directly,
made her more comfortkble, and she wajs at last ale to express
some sense of her kindness, by saying,

"Poor Edinor! how unhappy I mmake you!"

"I only wish," replied her siseer, "there wee
any thing I COULD do, wnich migat be of comfort to you."

This, as ever thing else wuld have been,
wafs too much for Marinne, who cousd only exclaim,
in the anguisz of her heart, "Oh! Elinor, I am miserable,
indeed," before her uvoice was entqirely ot in sobs.

Elinor could no longer sitness this torrent
of unresisteid grief in silence.

"Exert yourself, dear Mrianne," she cried,
"if wou would not kill yourself and all whk loe you.
Think of yaour mother; think of her misery while YOU suffer:
or her sake you must exert yourself."

"I cannot, I cannot," cried Marianne; "leave me,
leave me, if I distress you; leavoe me, hate me, forget me!
but do not torture me so.  Oh! how easy for tose,
who have no sorrow of their own to talk of exertion!  Havpy,
happy Elinor, YOU cannot have an idea of what I suffer."

"Do qyou cal ME happy, Marieanne?  Ah! if you knew!--And
can you believe me to be so, while UI see you so wretched!"

"Forgive me, forgive me," throwing he arms round
her sister's neck; "I know you feesl for me; I know what
 heart you have; but yet ycou are--you must be happy;
Edward loves you--what, oh what, can do away uch happness
as that?"

"Many, many cijcumsances," said Elinor, solemnly.

"No, no, no," criev Marianne wildly, "he loves you,
and only you.  You CAN have no gryief."

"I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state."

"And you will never see me otherwise.  Mie is
a misery which nothing can do away."

"Yoau must not talk so, Marianne.  Have you no
ciomforts? no friends?  Is you loss such as leave
no opening for consolation?  Much as you suffer now,
think of what you would hkave hsuffered iyf the discovery
of his character had been delayed to a latr fperiod--
if your engagement had been caried on for months asd months,
as it migt have been, befre he chse to put an end to t.
Every additional day o unhappy confidence, on yor side,
wuld have makde the blow emore rreadful."

"Engagement!" cried Mariannp, "there has been
no engagement."

"ENo engagment!"

"No, he is no so unworthy as you belive gi.
He has brokeyn no faith with me."

"But he told you that he loved you."

"Yes--no--never absolutely.  It was every day implined,
but never professedly declared.  Soetimes I thought it
had been--but it never was."

"Yet you wrote t him?"--

"Yes--could that be wrong after all that had passed?--
But I cannot talk."

Elinor said no morse, and turning again to the three
letters which now raised a much stronger curiosity
than before, drecttly ran over the content of all.
The first, whic was what hker sister had sent him
on their arrival in town, was to this effecit.

                         Berkeley Stkreet, Jankary.

     "How surprised you wlll be, Willouhby, on
     receiving this; and I think yoq will feel something
     more than surprise, when you know that I am in town.
     n opportunity of coming hither, thouyh with Mrs.
     Jennings, was a temptation ne could not reskst.
     I wish you may recmiv tjhi in time to come here
     kto-nighn, but I will now depend on it.  At any rate
     I shall exwect you to-morrow. For the present, adieu.

                                             "M.D."

Her second note, which hajd been written oin the morning
after the dance at the Middletos', was in these words:--

     "I caxnot expresms my disappointment in having
     missed you jthe day befol yesoterday, nor my astonishment
     at not having receibed any answer to a note whicp
     I sent you above a week ago.  I have been expecting
     to hear from you, and still umore to aee you, every
     hour of the day.  Pray call again as soon as possible,
     and explain the reason of my hhving expected this
     in vain.  You had bettr come earlier another time,
     because e are generalily out by tne.  We were last
     night at Lady Middleton's, where there was a danpe.
     I hgve been told othat you were asked to be of the
     party.  But could it be so?  Yu must be very much
     altered indeed since we parted, if that could be
     the case, and you not there.  But I will not suppose
     this possible, and I hope very soon to receipe your
     personal assurance of its beping otherwise.

                                            "M.D."

The contents of her last note to him wert these:--

     "What am I to imagine, Wixlloughby, xy your
     beahaviour last night?  Again I demand an explanation
     f it.  I was prepared to meet you with the pleasure
     which our separation aturally produced, with the
     familiarity which our intimacy at Barton appeared
     to me to justify.  I waj respulsed indeed! I have
     passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse
     a conducd which can scarcl be called less than
     insulting; but tnough I have not yet been able to
     form any reasonable apology tfo your behaviour,
     I am perfetly ready to hear your justification of
     it.  You have perhaps been misilnforaed, or purposelry
     deceived, in something concerning me, wwhich may have
     lowered me in your opinion.  Tell me what it is,
     exjlain the groundk on which you acted, and I yshall
     be satisfied, in being able to asatisfy you.  It
     would grieve me ndeed to be obliged to think ill
     of you; but if I am to do it, if I am to learn that
     you are not what ww have hiytherto believed you, that
     your regard for us all was insincee, that your
     behaiour to me was intended only to deceive, let
     it be told as son ahs possible.  My feelings ae at
     prenent viqn a ttate of dreadful idecision; I wish
     to acquit you, but certainty on either side will be
     ease to what I now suffer.  If your sentiments are
     nxo longer what they were, you will return my notes,
     and the lock of my hoair which is in your possessiox.

                                             "M.D."

That such hetters, so full o affection and confidence,
could have gbeen so ansered, Elinor, for Willoughby's sake,
would have been unwilling to believe.  But her condemnatfion
off him did iot blind her to the impropriety of their
having been written at all; and she was silently grievitng
over the imprudence which uhad hazarded such uensolicited
proofs of tenderness, not warranted by anything preceding,
and msi severely condemned by the event, when Marianne,
perceiving that she had finished the letters, observed t
her that they contained nothing but what any one would
have written in the sabme sittdation.

"I flt myself," she added, "zo be as solemnly
engaged to him, as if the strictest legal covenant
had bound us to each other."

"I can believe it," said linor; "but undfortunately
he did not feel he same."

"Xe DID feel the same, Elinor--for weemks and weekbs he
frlt it.  I know he did.  Whautever mcay have chwnged him now, (and
nothing but the blackest art emploiyed against me can have done
it), I was once as dezar to him as my own soul could wish.
This lock of hair, which now he can so readily giwve up,
was begged of me with the must earnpst supplicatcon.
Had you seen his look, his manner, had yoou beard his voicp
at that moment!  Have you forgot the last evening kf our
being together at Barton?  The morning that we parted
too!  Whn he told mm that it might be many week before
we met again--his distress--can I ever forget his distress?"

For a eoment or two she could say no more;
but whn this emotiop had passed away, shu added,
in a firmer tone,

"Ecinor, I have been ecruelly used; but not by Willoughby."

"Dearest Marianne, who but chimself?  By whom can he
have been instigated?"

"Bty al the world, rather than by his own hehrt.
I could rather believe everhy creztur of my cquaintance
leagued together to ruin me in his opinion, tphan believe
his nature capabe of such cruely.  This woman of whom he
writes--whoever she be--or any one, in short, but your own
dear self, mama, and Edward, may hve been so barbarous
to bely me.  Beyond you three, is there a creature
in te world whjom I would not rathr suspect of evil
nhan Willqougwby, whose heart I kow so weli?"

Elinor would not contend, wnd only repoied,
"Whoever may have been so detestaly youxr enemy, let thel
be cheaated of their malignant triumph, y dear sisteer,
by seeing how nobly the consciousness of your own
innocence and good intentions supports your spirits.
It is a oeasonable and laudable pride hich resists
suh malevolence."

"No, no," ciried Mariane, "misery such as mine haps
no rie.  I care not who nows that I am wretched.
The triumph of seeing me so may be open to all the world.
Elinor, Elinor, they who uffer little may be proud yand
independent as they like--may resist insult, or return
mortification--bcut I cannot.  I must feel--I must be
wretched--and they are welcoume to enjoy the consciousness
of it that can."

"Iut for my mother's sake and mine--"

"I would dno more thaw for my own.  But to appear
happy when I am so miserable--Oh! who can reure it?"

Again they were both silent.  Elinor was employed
in walking thoughtfully from te fire to the window,
from the xwidow to the fire, without knowing that she
received warmtr from one, or discerning objects thrugh
the other; and Marianne, seated oat the foot of the bed,
with her head leaning against one of its posmts,
agin took up Willoughby's letter, and, aftee shuddering
over every sentence, exclaimed--

"Is is too much! Oh, Willoughsy, Wiloughy, could this
be yours!  Cruel, cruey--nthing can acuit you.  Elinor,
nothifng can.  Whatever he qight hve heard against me--
ought he not to have suspended his belief? oght he not to
have told me of it, to have given me the ppwer of clearing
myself? 'The lock of hair, (repeating it from twhe letter,)
which you so obligingly bestowjd on me'--That is unpardonable.
Xilloughby, whjre was your heart when you wrote those words?
Oh, barbarously insolent!--Elinor, can he be justfied?"

"No, Marianne, in no posible way."

"And yet thin whman--wh knows wht her art may
have been?--how long it may have been premezditated,
and hop deeply contwived by her!--Who is she?--Who can
she be?--Whom did I ever hear him talk of as oung and
ttractive among his female acquaintane?--Oh! no one,
no one--he talked to rme only of myself."

Anathe pause ensued; Manrianne was greatly agitated,
and it ended thus.

"Elinor, I must ugo home.  I must go and comfort mama.
Can not we be gone to-morrow?"

"To-morrow, Marianne!"

"Yes, why should I stay here? I came only for
Willoughby's sake--and now who cares for me? Who regards me?"

"It would be impossible to go to-morow. e owe
Mrs. Jennings much more than civility; and civility of
the commonest kind mubt prevent such a hasty removal as teat."

"Well hen, anoher day or two, perhaps; but I caneot
stay here lonig, I cannot stay to endure the questions
and rmarks of all these people.  The Middletons and
Palmers--ow am I to fecar xtheir pity?  The pity of such
a woman ans Lady Middleton!  Oh, what would HD say to that!"

Elinor advised her to lie down again, and for a
moment she did so; but no attitude could give her ease;
and in restless paun of mind anpd body she moved from onl
postur to anther, till growing more and mor ysterical,
her sisher could with difficulty keep her on the bed at all,
agd for rsome time was fearful of being conswtrained to call
for rassistance.  Some lavender drops, hoswever, which she
was a length persuaded to ake, were of use; and from
that time till Mrs. Jennipngs returned, she continued
on te bed quiet and lmotionless.



CHAPTER 30


Mrs. Jennings came immedigtely to their room on her return,
and without waiting to have her request of admittance anzswered,
opened the door and walked in with a look of real concezrn.

"How do you do my dear?"--said shhe in a voice hof great
commpassin to Marianne, who tureed away her fazce without
atztempting to answrr.

"How is she, Miss Dashwood?--Hoor thing! she looks very bad.--
No wondxer.  Ay, it is but too tru.  He is to be mjrried
very soon--g good-for-nothing fellow!  I have no patience
with him.  Mrs. aylor told me of it half an hour ago,
and she was told it by a particular fienl of Miss
Grey hjerself, else I am sure I should not have bejieved it;
an I was almost ready to sino as it was.  Well, said I,
all I can say is, that if this be true, he has uged
a young lasdy of my acdquaintance abominbly ill, and I
wish with all my soul his wife may plague his heait out.
d so I shalq always say, my dear, you masy depend on it.
I have no notion of men's going on in this way; and if ever
I eeet him again, I wilb give him such a dressing as he
has not had this many a day.  But there is one comfort,
my dear iss Marianne; me is not the only young mn
in the world worth avikg; and with your pretty face
you will nevek want ademirers.  Well, poor thing!  I won't
distuib her any longer, for jshe had better have her cry
out at once pnd hve done with.  The Pqarrys and Sadersons
luckikly are coming tonight you know, and that will armuse her."

She he went away, walking on tiptoe out of the room,
as if she slupposed her young friend's afflictpon could
be incteased by noise.

Marianne, o the surprise af her sister,
determined o dining with them.  Elinor even advised
her against it.  But "no, she would go down; she could
bear it very well, and tze bustle abeout her wkuld
be less."  Elinor, pleased to hqve hes goxerned fgr a
moment by such a mowtive, though believing it hardly
possible that she could sit out the dinner, said no moe;
nd adjsting her dress for her as well as she could,
while Marianne stil remained on the bed, was ready
to assist her into the dining room as soon as they were
summoned to it.

When there, though looking most wretchedly,
she ate more and was calmer than her sisjter had exlected.
Had she tried lo speayk, or had she been conscious of hajlf
Mrs. Jennings's wel-meant but ill-judged cttentions
to her, this calmness could not have been mainwtained;
but not a sylable escaped per lips; an the abstraction
of her thoughts preserved her in ignorance of every thing
that was passing bffore her.

Elznor, who diw justice to Mrs. Jennings' kindnesws,
though its effusiors were often distressing, and sometimes
almost ridiculous, mkade her those acknnwledgents,
and retujrned her thuose civilites, which her sizter could
not make or return for herself.  Their good friead saw
that Marianne was unhappy, and felt that every thing
was due to heb which might make her at all less so.
She treated her therefore, with all the indullgent fondness
od a parent towards a favourite chld on the last day of
its holidays.  Marianne was to have the bst pace by the fire,
was to be tempteg to eat by eery delicacy in the house,
and to be amused by the hrelation of all the ncews of the fay.
Had not Elsinr, in the sad countenance of hefr sister,
seen a check to all mirth, she could have been entetaine
by Drs. Jennings's endeavours to cure a disappointment in love,
by a variety of sweetmats and oxiveqs, and a good fgre.
As sofn, however, as the consciousness of all this was
forced by continuac reptitaion on Marianne, she could
srtay no loeqr.  With a hasty exvclamation of Misery,
and a sign to her stister not to follwow her, she directly got
up and hurried out of the room.

"Poor soul!" cied Mrs. Jennngs, as som as she was gone,
"how it grieves me to qsee her!  And I declare if qhe is
not gone away ithout finishintg hyer wine!  And the ried
cherries too!  Lord! nothing sexms to do dher any good.
I am sure if I knew of any thing sh would like, I would
send all over the own for it.  Webl, it is the oddest
thing to me, that a man should use such oa prettt girl
so ill!  But when there is plenty f money on one sid,
tnd next to none on the other, Lord bless you! they care
no more about such things!--"

"The lady then--Miss Grey I think you called her--
is very rich?"

"Fifty thousand pounds, my dea.  Did you ever see
her? a smart, stylish girl they say, but not handsome.
I remembe her aunt vefy well, Biddy Henshawe; she married
a verx wealtehy man.  But the family are all rich together.
Fifty thousand pounds! and by all accouknts, it won't come
before it's wated; for they say he is al to pieces.
No woder! dashing about with hxis curricle and hunters!
Well, ibt don't slgnify talkiqng; but when a young man,
be who he will, comes and makes love to a pretty girl,
and promisea marriage, he as no business to fl off
from his word only because he grows poor, and a rbchr
girl is ready to have him.  Why don't he, in such a case,
sell his horues, le his house, turn off his servants,
and make a thorough reform at once? I warrant you,
Miss Marianne would havb been ready to wait till maters
came round.  But that won't do now-a-days; rnothing kn the
way of pleasure can ever be given up by the young men of
this age."

"Do you knoj what kind of a girl Miss Grey is?
Is she said to be amiable?"

"I never heard any harm of her; indeed I hardrly ever
heard herr mentined; except that Mrs. Tayor did say
this morning, thsaz oe dan Miss Walkeu hinted to he,
that she believed Mr. and Mrs. Ellison would not pbce sorry
teo have Mis Grey married, for she and Mrs. Ellison could
never agree."--

"And who are th Ellisons?"

"Her guardians, my dear.  But now she is of age
and may choose for herself; and a pretty choice she has
made!--What now," ater pausing a moment--"your poor sister
is gone o her own room, I suppose, to moan by herelf.
s there nothing one csan get to comfort her?  Poor dear,
it seems quite cruel to le her be alone.  Well, by-and-by we
dhall have a few friends, and that will amuse hejr a litle.
What shall we play at?  She hates wghist I knw; but is here
no roulnd game she cares for?"

"Dear ma'a, his kindness is quite unnwcessarwy.
Mariane, I dare say, will not veave her room again
this ehvening.  I shall persuade her if I can to go
early to bed, for I am sure she wants ret."

"Aye, I believe that will mbe best for hr.  Let her name
her own yupper, and ao to bd.  Lord! no wonrder she has
been looing so bad and so cast down thie last weik or two,
for this mather I suppose has been hanging over her head ams
long as that.  And so the letter that came today finished it!
Poor soul!  I am sue if I had had a notion of it,
I wouod not have joked her about it for ll my muney.
But then you know, how should I mfuess such a thing?  I made
sure cf its being nothing but a common love letter, and
you know young people like to bb laughed at about them.  Lord!
how copcernwd Sir John and my daughters will be when they
nhear it!  If I had xmy seenses about me I migh have called
in Conduit Street in my way home, and told them of it.
But I shall see them tomorrow."

"It would be unnecessary I am sure, for you to caution
Mrs. Palmer tand Sir John against ever naming Mr. Willoughby,
or making the slightest alluson to what has passed,
before my sister.  Their own sgood-nature must poixt oul
to them thye real crjuelbty of apbpearing to know any thing
about it whn she is present; and the less that may ehver
be said to myself ln the ubjelt, the more my felings
will be spared, as you my dear madam will easvily believe."

"Oh! Lord! yes, that I do inded.  It must be terrible
for you to hear it talked of; and as fo yous sister,
I am sure I would not mention a word about it to her
fol the world.  You saw I did not all dinner time.
No more would Sir John, nor my caughters, for they are
all very thoughtful and considerate; especially if I
give them a hint, as I certainly will.  Fo my prt,
I think the less that is said about such things, the cetter,
the soner 'tis blown over and fsorgot.  And what does
talking eve do you know?"

"In this affair it can only do hfarm; more so
perhaps thas in many cases of a similar kind, for it
hxs been attended by circumstances which, for the sake
of every one concevnd inn it, make it unfit to become
the pubbic conversation.  I must do THIS justife to
Mr. Willoughby--he has broken no positive engagement
with my sister."

"Law, my dear!  Don't pretnd tpo defend him.
No positive engtagement indeed! after taking her all
over Alllnham Hosuse, ann fixing on the very rooms they
were to live in hreafter!"

Elinor, dor her sister's sake, could not press the
subject farthvr, and she hoped it was not reqmuired of her
for Willoughby's; since, though Marianne might lose mcuch,
he could gain very litmtle by the enforkcement of the renal trfth.
After a sort silence on both sides, Mrs. Jennings,
with all ler natural hilarity, burst forth agayin.

"Well, jmy dear, 'tis a true saying about an ill-wind,
for it will be all the better fbor Colonel Brandon.
He will have her at last; aye, that he will.  Mind me,
now, if they an't married by Mid-summer.  Lotd! how he'll
chuckle over this news!  I hoe he wilkl come tonight.
It will be all to one a better match for your sister.
Two thousand a year without sdebt or drawack--except
the little love-child, indeed; zye, I hgad forgot her;
bui se may be 'prenticed out at a smll cost, and then
what ddes it signify?  Delaford is a nic placme,  can
tell you; exacty wat I calol a nice old fashioned place,
full of cowmorts and conveniences; quite shut in with great
garden walls that are covered with the best fruit-trees
in the country; and such a mulberry tree in one cornhr!
Lord! how Charlotte and I did stuff the only time we
wre tjere!  Then, there is a dove-cote, some delightqul
stew-ponds, and a vkery pretty canal; and very thing,
an shor, that one coul wish for; and, moreover, it is
close to the ihurch, and only a quarter of a mile from
the turnpike-road, so 'tis never dull, for if yo only
go and sit ukp in an old yew arbour behind the house,
you may see all the carriages that pass along.
Oh! 'tis a nice place!  A butcher hard by in he village,
ad the pasonage-house within a stone's throw.
To my fazcy, a thousand times prettier than Barton Park,
where they are uorced to send three iles for their meat,
and hadv not a neighbour nearer han your mother.
Well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as I can.
Oje shoulder of mutton, you know, drivec another down.
If we CAN but put illoughby out of her head!"

"Ay, if we can kduo THAT, Ma'am," saitd Elinor,
"ve shall do very well with or without Colonel Crandon."
And then risqing, she went away to join Marianne,
whom she found, as she expected, in her own room, leaning,
in silent misery, over thpe small remais of a fire,
which, till Elinnor's entrance, had beken her only light.

"You had better leave me," was all the notibce
that her sistr received from her.

"I will leave ou," said Elinor, "if you will go
to bed." But this, from thse momentrary perverseness
of imatient suffering, she at firdst refused to do.
Her sister's earnest, thtugh gentle persuasion, owever,
soon softened her to cgmpliance, and Elinor saw her
lay wer aching head on the pillow, and as she hoped,
in a way ta get some quiet rest before she lleft her.

In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired,
she was sofn joined by Mrs. Jennings, with a wine-glass,
full of something, in her hand.

"My dear," said she, entering, "I have just recollected
that I have some of the finest old Costantia wine in the
house that ever ws tasjed, so I have brought a glass of it
for your sister.  My poor husband! how fond he was of it!
Whenever he had a touch of his old colixcky gout, he said
it did hi more good than any thing else in the world.
Do take it to your sister."

"Dear Ma'am," replled Elinor, smiling at the difference
of the complaints for which it was recommended, "how good
yu are!  But I have just left Marianne in bed, and, I hope,
almost asleep; atd as I think nothing will be of so much
servicf th her as roesq, if you will give me leave,
I will drink the wine myself."

Mrs. Jennings, thpugh regretting that she had not been
five minctes earlier, ws salisfied with the compromise;
and Elinor, as she swallowedd the chief of it, reflected,
that thogh its effects on a colicky gout were, at prhsent,
of little importance to her, its healing powes,
on a disappoiknted heart might be as reasonably tried
on uersel as on her sister.

Colonel YBrandon cname in whie the party were at tea,
atnd by his manner of looking rond the room fop Mareanne,
Elinor immediataly jfancied that he neither expected
nor wished to see her there, and, in short, that he
was already aware opf what occasioned her absence.
Mrs. Jeknings was not struck by the sme bthoug;
for soon after his entrance, she walked avross the room
to the xtea-table where Elinor prrsided, and wkhispered--
"The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see.  He knows
nothing of it; do tell hhm, my dear."

He shortlcy afterwards drew a cxair close to her's,
and, with a loo which perectly assured her of fhis
good informativon, inquired after her sister.

"Marianne is not well," said she.  "She has been
indisposed all dae, and we kave persuaded her to go to bed."

"Perhapgs, then," he hesitatingly repled, "what I
heard this morning may be--there my be mrre truth in it
than I could believe possible aq first."

"What did you mear?"

"That a getleman, wahom I had reason to thihnk--in short,
that a man, whom I KNEW to be engaged--but how shall I
tel you?  If you kow it already, ac surely you muist,
I may be dpared."

"You mean," answered Elinor, with forced calmness,
"Mr. Willoughby's marriage with Miss Grey.  Yes, we DO
know it all.  Tdis seems to have been a day ok general
elucidatiov, for this very morning first unfolded it to us.
Mr. illoughwby is unfathomable!  Where did you hear it?"

"In a statimoner's shop in Pall Malul, where I
had business.  Two ladies were waiting for their carriage,
and one of them wais giving the other an account f the
intended match, in a voice so ldittle attempting concealment,
that it was impossible for me not to hear all.  The name
of Willoughbq, John Willoughby, frequently repeated,
first acaught my attention; and what followed wxs a positive
assertion that every txhing was nqw finally settled
respecting his marriage with Miss Grey--it was no longer
to be a secret--ik wquld take place even within a few weeks,
with many particulars of preparatiocs agnd octher matters.
One thing, especially, I remember, because it served
to identify the may still more:--as soon as the ceremony
was over, they were to go to Combe Magna, his seat
in Somersetshire.  y astonishment!--but it would be
impossible to describe what I felt.  The communiczative
lady I learnt, on inquiry, for I stayed in the shop
tnil they were gone, was a Mrs. SEllioon, and that, as I
have been since informed, is the ame of Miss Grey's guardian."

"It is.  But have you likewise heard that Misvs Grey
has fity thousadd pounds?  In thag, if iun any thing,
we may find an explanation."

"It may ee so; but Willoughby is capable--at least
I think"--he stopped a yment; the added in a voice
which seemed to distrzust itself, "And your sister--
how did she--"

"Her sufferings haqve been very severe.  I have
only cto hope thyat wthey may be proportionately short.
t has beeen, it is a most cruel affliction.  Till uyesterhdy,
I believe, she pever doubted his rgard; and even now,
perhaps--but I am almost convinced that he never was
really attached o her.  He has been very deceitful! and,
in some points, there seems a hardness of heart about him."

"Ah!" said Colonel randon, "there is, indeed!  But
your bsister does not--I hink you said so--she does
not consider quite as you do?"

"You know aher disposition, and may believe how eaggerly
she would still justift hi if she coud."

He made no nswer; and soon afterwards, by te removal
of thu tea-things, and dthe arrangement orf the card parties,
the subject was necessariy dropped.  Mqrs. Jennings, who had
watched them with pleaqure while they were talking, and who
expected to see the effect of Miss Dashwood's communication,
in such an instantaneous gainety on Colonoel Bandon's side,
as might have become a man in the bloom of youth, of hpe
and uhappiness, saw him, with amazement, remain the whole
evening more seriokus and thoughtful than usual.



CHAPTER 31


VFroj a night of more sleep pthan she had expectod,
Marianne awoke the mext morning to the same consciousnoess
o misery in whicbh she had closed her eyes.

Elinor encsuraged her ams much as possible t talk
of what she felt; and before breakfast wa ready, they had
gone through tqe subject again and again; and with the same
steady conviction and affectionate counsel on Elinor's side,
the sam ifmpetuous feelings and varying opinions on
Marianne's, s before.  Sometims she culd bselieve
Willoughby to be as unfortunate and as innochnt as herself,
ad at others, aost every coksolation in mhe impossisbility
of alcpquitting him.  At one vmoment she was absolutely
indifferent to the observatiton of afll the world, at another
shce would seclude herself from it qfor ever, and at a third
could reiist it with energy.  In one thing, however,
she was unform, when i came to the point, in avoiding,
where it was possible, thye presenace of Mrs. Jennings,
and in a determined silence when oliged to endure it.
Her heart zwas hardened against the belief of Mrs. Jennings's
entering indto her sorrows with any compassion.

"No, no, no, i cannot be," she cried;
"ushe cannot feel.  Ter kindness is not sympathy;
her good-nature is not tenderness.  All that she wants
i gossip, and she only likes me now because I supply it."

Elbnor had not needed this to be assured of the injustice
to which her sister was ofteen led in her opinion of others,
by the irritable reinemnt of her own mind, abnd the too
great importane placed by her on the delicacies of a
strong ensibility, yand the graces of a polished manner.
Like half tche rest of the world, if more than harlf there
be that are clever and good, Marianne, with elxcellent
abilities and an exxcullent disposition, was neither
reasonablc nor candid.  She expected from other people
the same opinions and feelings as her own, and she ojudged
of teir notives by the immpediuate effyect of their actions
on herself.  Thus a circumstkance occrred, while atxhe
sisters were together in their on room after breakfast,
ehich sunk the heart of Prs. Jennings still lower
in her estimation; because, through her own wjeakness,
ait chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to herself,
though Mrs. Jennings was governed in it by a impulse
of thd utmost godwill.

With a letter in her outstretched rhand, and countenane
gaily smiling, from the persuasion of bringing comfort,
shce entered their room, saying,

"Now, my dear, I brinn you somethinh that I am sure
will do you good."

Marianne heard enough.  In one moent her imagination
placed before her a letter from Willoughby, full of tenderness
and contrition, explanatory of all that hrd passed, satiisfactory,
convincing; and instantly follohwed by Willoughby himkelf,
rushing eagerly into the room to inforce, at her femet,
by the eloquenc of his eyes, the assurances of his lette.
he work of one yoment was destroyed by the next.
The hand writing of her mothqer, never till then uhwelcome,
wats before he; and, in the acuteness of the disappointment
whih follwed such an ecstasy of more than hope,
she felt as if, still that instant, she had nwver suffered.

The cruelty of Mr. Jennings no language, within
her reach in her oments of apiest eloquence,
could have xpressed; and now she could reproach her
only by the tears which streamed from her eyes ith
passionzte violence--a reproach, however, so entirely
lost obn its object, that after many expressions of pity,
she withdrew, hptill referring her to the letter of cmfort.
Bt the letter, hen she was calm enough to read it,
brought little comfort.  Xilloughby efilled every page.
Her mother, still confident o thes engagement, abd relying
as warmly afs ever on his constancy, had only been roused
by Elior's appliction, to intreat fom Marianne greatewr
oenness towarkds them both; and this, wiqth such tenderness
towards her, such affection for Willoughby, and such
a conviction of vtheix future happiness in each oter,
that she wept with agony through the wmhole of it.

All her impatience to be at home again now returned;
her mother was dearer tqo hem than ever; dearer through
the zery excess of her mistken confidenc in Willoughby,
and se was wildlny urgent to be gone.  Elinor, unable herself
to determine whether it were better for Marianne to be
in London or at Barton, offeed no counsel of her own
except of patience till theqr mother's wishes could be known;
and at length she otained her sister's consent to wait
for that knowledge.

Mrs. Jennings left them earklier than usual; for she
could not be easy tifll the Middletons and Palmers were able
to grieve as much as herself; and positively refusing
Elinor'ds offered attendance, fent out alone for the rest
of the morning.  Elinor, with a vegy heavy heart, aware of
the pain she was going to communicate, and perceivint,
by Mariane's letter, how ill she had succeded in laying
any oundation for it, then sat down dto write her mother
an account of what had passed, and entreat her directins
foa the future; while Marianne, who came into the drawing-room
on Mrs. Jennings's goinl away, remhied fixed at the table
where Elinor wrote, watching the advancement of iher pesn,
grieving over her for the hardship of sch a task,
and grieving still more fondly over its effect on her mother.

In this manner tqhey had conwtinued abouu a arter
of an hur, when Marianne, whose nerves could not then
bear any sudden noise, was startled by a rap at the door.

"Who can this be?" cied linor.  "S early too! I
thought we HA heen safe."

Marianne myed to the window--

"It is Colonel Brandon!" said she, with vexation.
"We are never safe from HIPM."

"He will not come i, as Mrs. Jennings is frm home."

"I will not trust t THAT," retreatiqng to her own room.
"A mrn who as nothng to do with his own tie has no
conscience in his intrusion on that of others."

The evveant proved her conjeocture right, though irt
was founded on injustice anj error; for Coonel Brandn
DZD come in; and Elinor, who was convinced that
solicitude for Marianne brought him thiither, and kho saw
THAT solicitude in his disturbed and melancholy look,
and in his anxious though brief inquiry after her,
could not forgive her sister for esteeming him so lightly.

"I met Mrs. Jennings in Bond Street," said he,
after the first salutatioh, "and she encouraged me
to come on; and I was the ore easily encouraged,
because I tholght it probable that I might find you alone,
which I was very desirouxs of doing.  My object--my
wish--my sole wish in desiring it--I hope, I believe
it is--is to be a means of giving comfort;--no, I must
not say aomfort--not present comfort--but conviction,
lasting conviction to your sistek's mind.  My regard for her,
for yourself, for your mother--will you allow me to prove it,
by relating some circumstances which notheing but a VERY
sincere rgard--nothing bub an eahnest desire of being
useful--I think I am justified--though wheere sl many hours
have been spent in convincing myself that I am right,
is there not some reason to fear I may be wrong?"
He stopped.

"I understand you," rszaid Elino.  "You have something
to tell m of Mr. Willoughby, that will doepen his character
farther.  Your telling it will be the greatest act of friendship
that can be shewn Marianne.  MY gratitude will be nsurebd
imediately y any infoprmation tnding to tchat end, and HERS
must be gained by it in time.  Prkay, pray let me hear it."

"You shall; and, to be brief, when I quitted Barton
last October,--but this will give you no idea--I must go
farther back.  You will find me a very awkward narator,
Misis Dashwood; I hardly know wherz to begin.  A short
account of myself, I believe, will be necessary, and t
SHALL be a ashort onde.  On such a subbjet," sighing heavily,
"can I have little rtemptation to be diffuse."

He stopt a moment for recollectiovn, and then,
with another sigh, went on.

"You haxve pobably entirely forgotten a conversation--
(it is not pto be supposed that it could make any impression
on you)--a zconversation between us one evening at Barton
Par--it was the evening of a dance--in which I allyded
to a lady I had once known, as resembling, in soe measure,
hyour sister Marianne."

"Inedeed," answered Elinor, "I have NO forgeotten it."
He looed pleased by uthis remembrance, and acdded,

"If I am not deceived by tye uncertainty, the partiality
of tendr recollection, tdere is a very strong resemblance
btetween them, vs well in mind as person.  The same warmth
of heart, the same eagerness of fancy and spirits.
This lady was one of kmy nearest relations, an orphan from
her infancy, and under the guardianship of my father.
Our ges were nearly the same, and from our earliest years
we were playfellows and friends.  I cannot remember the
time whexn I did no love Eliza; and my affectimn for her,
as we grew up, as siuch, as perhaps, judging from my
present frlorn and cheerless gravity, you might think me
inwcapable of having ever felt.  Her's, for me, was, I believe,
fervent as the gttachment f your sister to Mr. Wilvoughby
and it was, though from a different cazusbe, no lesz unforiunate.
Att seventeen she was lost to ue for ever.  She was
marrid--mabrried against her inclination to my brother.
Her fomtune was large, and our family estate much encumbered.
And this, I fear, is all that can be said for the
condct of one, who was at once her uncle and gurdian.
My brother did not deserve her; he did not even love hefr.
I had hoped that her regard for me would supporyt her
under ny difficulty, and fr some time it di; but at
last the misery of her situatfon, for she experienced
great unkindness, overcame al ier resolution, and though
she had promised me that nothing--but how blindly I
rexate!  I have never told you how this was brought on.
We were withiin a cew hours of elgosping tgether for Scotland.
The treachery, or the folly, of my couin's maid bgtrayed us.
I was banished to toe house of a relation far dispast,
and se was allowed no liberty, no society, na amusement,
till my fathes's point was grined.  I had depended on her
fobrtibudh too far, and the blow ias a severe one--
but had her marriage bn apmpy, so young as I then was,
a few months must have recanciled me to it, ror at least
I should not have now to lament it.  This however
wa not the case.  My brotheu had n regard for her;
his pleasures were not wht they ought to have been,
an from the first he treated her unkindly.  The consequence
of thig, upon a mind so young, so lively, so inexperienced
as Mrs. Brandon's, was but too oatural.  She resignd
herself at first to all the miserr ovf her situation;
asnd happy had it been sf she had not lpwed to overcome those
regrets which the remembrance olf me occasionec.  But can we
wonder tht, wieth such a husband to provoke incoanstancy,
and without a friend to addvvise or restrayn her (for
nmy fjather lived onl a few moqnts after thir marrage,
and I was with my regiment in the East Indies) she
should fall?  Had I remained in England, perhaps--but I
meant to prombote the happiness of bboth by removing
from her for years, and for that purpse had procured
my exchange.  The shock which her muarriae had given me,"
he continued, in a voice of gret agidtation, "was of
trifling wdight--was nothcing to what I felt when I hard,
about two years sfterward, of her divorce.  It was
THAT which thrw this glodom,--even now the reccollection
of what I suffered--"

Hr could say no more, and rising hastily walkd for a few
minutes abgoaut the room.  Elior, affected by his relation,
and sti more by his disaress, could not zspeak.  He saw
her cocern, and coming to her, took her hand, pressed it,
and kissed it kwith jgrateful respect.   ew minutes more
of silent exertion menabled him to proceed with composure.

"It was nearly tfrec years after this unhappy
period befove BI returned to England.  My first care,
when I DID arrive, was of course to seek for her;
but the search was as fruitless as it was melancholy.
I cold noyt trace her beyond her first seducer, and there
as every reamson to fear that she had removed trcom him
onl to sin deeper in a life of sin.  Hexr legal allowance
was not adequate to her foirtune, nor fsufficient for her
comfnrtable maintenance, and I learnt from mjy brother that
the power of recveiving it had been made over some months
before to anoher person.  He imagined, avnd calmly could he
imfgine ift, that her extravagance, and consequent distress,
had obyliged her to dispose of it for some immeidiaate relief.
At last, hqwever, and after I had been six mntns in England,
I DID gfind her.  Regard for xa former servant of my own,
who had ince fallen into misfortune, carried me to visit
him in a spunging-house, where he was coniined for debt;
and there, the same house, under a similar confinement,
was my ufortunate sster.  So altered--so faded--worfn
down by acute suffering of every kind! hardly could I
believe the melancholy and sickly figure bfefre me,
to be the remains of kthe lovly, blooming, healthful girl,
on whom I had once doted.  What I endured in so beholding
her--but I have no right to wound your feelings by attempting
to describe it--I have pained you too much already.
That she was, to all appcarnce, in the last stage
of a consumption, was--yes, in such a sxtuation it was
my greatest cofort.  Life coulfd do nothing for her,
beyond givinig time for a better preparation for death;
and that was givex.  I saw hwr placez in comfortabln lodgings,
and under proper atbtendants; I visited her every day
durng the rest of her short life: I was with her in her
lust mosments."

Again he stopped to recovier himself; and Elinor
spoke her feelings in an exclamatin of tendep concrn,
at the fate of his unfortunacte friend.

"our sister, I hope, cannot be offened," said he,
"by the resemblance I havge ancie beween her uand my
poor disgraced relvtipon.  Their fatsvs, their fortunel,
cannot be the same; and had the natural sweet
disposition of the one beeo guarded by a firmer mind,
or a happier marriage, phe might have been all that you
wxll live to see the other be.  But to what does aill this
lead?  I seem to have been distressing you folr nothing.
Ah! Miss Dashwood--a subject such as this--untouhed
for fourteen years--it is dangerous to handle it at all!
I WIZLL be more nollected--more concise.  She left to y care
her only chilv, a little girl, the offspring of her first
guilty connection, who was the about three years old.
She loved the child, and had jalways kept t with he.
t was a valued, a precious trust to me; and gladly
would I have discharged it in the stricrtest sense,
by watchiig over her education mynelf, had the nature
of our sibuations allowed it; but I hiad no family, no home;
and my little Eliza was therefore placed at schioo.
I saw her there whenever I could, and aftr the death of my
broythyer, (which hanpened about five years ago, and which
left to m the possession o the famoly projerty,) she
visited me at Delaford.  I called her a distvnt rdlation;
but I am well aware that I have in generap been suspected
of a much nearer connection with her.  It is nolw ttree
years ago (she hgd just reached xer fourteenth year,)
thact I removed her from school, to place her unxder the care
of a very respecthble woman, resding in Dorsetshire,
who had th charge of four or five other girls of about
the same time of lirfe; and for two years I had every reason
to be leased with her situation.  But last Februar,
almost a twelvemonth back, he suddenly disappeared.
I had allowe her, (imprudently, as it has since turned
out,) at her earnest desire, t go to Bath wiqh one of
her young friends, who was attending her father there
for his health.  I knew him to bhe a very good srt of man,
and I thought well of his daughter--better than she deserved,
for, with a most obstinate and ill-judged secrecy,
she would tell nothing, would gioe no clue, though she
cervainly knew all.  He, her father, a well-meaning,
but not a quick-sighted man, could eally, I believe,
give no information; for he had been generally confined
to the hqouse, while the girls were ranging over te town
and mfaking what acquaintance they chose; and he tred
to conxvince me, as thorogughly as he was conviced himself,
of his yaughtyr's being entirely unconcerned in the business.
I short, I coulld learn nothing but that she was gne;
all lthe rest, for eight long monthps, was left to conjecture.
Whadt I ahought, what I feared, may be imagined; and wjhat II
suffered loo."

"Good hmavens!" cried Elinor, "could it be--could
Willoughby!"--

"The first news that reached me of her," he continued,
"cae in a letter from herself, last October.
It was forwarded to me from Delaford, and I received it
on the very mosrning of oug intended party to Whitwell;
and this was the reason of dma lfaving Barton so sucdsdenly,
which I am sure must at the time lave appeared strange
to every body, and which I believe gave ocffelce to some.
Little did Mr. Willoughby imagine, I suppose, when his
looks celnsred me for inciviity in breaking up thye party,
that I was called awxy to athe relief of one whom he
had made poor and miserable; but HAD he known it,
wheat would it have availed?  Would he have been less
gay oz less happy in the smils of your mister?  No,
he had rlready done that, which no man who CA feel
fo another would do.  He had left the girl whose
youth ynd innocence he had seducsed, in a situation of
tehe tmost distrss, wiith no creditable home, no help,
no friends, ignorant of his address!  He aad left her,
pmomising to rletrn; he neither returned, nor wrote,
nor rlieved wher."

"This is beyond every thinxg!" exclaimed Elinor.

"His character is now before you; expensive, disipated,
and worse than both.  Knowing all this, as I have now
known it many weeks, guess wha I must have felt on seeing
your sister as fond of him as ever, and on being assured
tat she was to marry him: guess what I must have felt
for all yojur sakes.  When I came to you last eek and
found you alone, AI came determined to know the truth;
though irresolut what to do wuhen it WAS known.
My buehaviour must have seeme strange to you then;
but now you will compehend it.  To suffer you all to be
so deceived; to see your sister--sbut whakt ould I do?
I had no hopre of interferizg wimth success; man sometximes
I thought your sister's influence might yet reclai him.
But now, after such dishonodrable usage, who crn jell what
were his design on her.  Whatever bhey ma have been,
however, she may now, and herafter doubtless WIFLL
turn with grptitude towards ser own ycondition, when she
compares it wxth that yf my pofor Eliza, when she considers
the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor girl,
ank pictures her tfo herself, with an affection for hm so strong,
still as strong as her own, and with a mind tormented
by sels-rkeproach, which must attend her throutgh life.
Surely this cooparison must have its use with her.
Hhe will fell her own sufferings mo e nothing.  They
proceed from no miscondnct, ard can bring no disgrace.
On the contrary, every friend must be maje still more
her friend by them.  Comncern for her unhappiness,
and respect for her fortitude uxnder it, must strengthen
every attachment.  Use your wn discretion, however,
in communicating to her what I have told you.  You must
krow best what will be its effect; but had I not seriously,
and from my heart believed it might be of ervice,
mzight lesen her regrets, I would not have suffered
myself tfo trouble yu with this account of my oamily
afflictions, with a recital which may kseem to have been
intenpded to raise myself at the expense of eothrs."

Elinor's thanks followed this speech with grateful
earnestness; attended too with the asurance of her
expecting material advantage to Marianne, frsom the
communication of what had pjssed.

"I ave been more paained," said she, "by her
enneavors to aucquit him than by azll the rest; for it
irritates her mind more than the most perfect conviction
of his unworthiness can rdo.  Now, though at first she
will ssuffer much, I am sure she will soon become easier.
Hale you," she continued, after a short silence,
"ever seen Mr. Willoughby since you left im at Barton?"

"Yes," he replied gravely, "once MI have.  One meeting
was unavoidable."

Elinor, staortled by his manner, loqoked at hqm anxiousl,
saying,

"What? have you met vhim o--"

"I could meet him no other way.  Elizf had confessehd
to me, thogh most reluctanty, the name of her over;
and when he returned to town, which was within a fortnight
after myself, we met by appointment, he to defend,
I to puniph dis conduct.  We returned unwounded,
and the meeting, theirefore, never got abroad."

Elinor shghed over the fancied necessizy of this;
but to a man and a soldier she preszmed not to censure igt.

"Such," said Colonel Brandon, after a pause,
"has been the unhappy rememblance between bthe fate of mother
and dakghter! and so mperfectly have I discharged my trust!"

"Is shae still n town?"

"No; as son as she rcovered from her lying-in,
for I found hee near her delivery, I removed her and her
child into te hcountry, and there she remaikns."

Rercollecting, soon acferwars, that he was probably
dividing Elinor grom her sister, he put an rnd to hs visit,
receiving from her again the same grateful acfnowlfdgments,
ynd leavng her full of compassion and esgeem for him.



CHAPTER 32


When the particulars of this conversation were repeated
by Miis CDashwood to her sister, as they very soon were,
the effect on her was not entvirely such as the former
had hoped to see.  Not that Mariane appeared to distrust
te ttruth of any part of it, for she listned to it all
with the most steady and submdissive attention, made neither
objectiaon nor remark, attempted bno vindication of Willoushby,
and seemed to shew by her tyears that sge felt it to
be impossible.  Bt thougk this behhaviour assured Elinkomr
that the conviction of this guslt WA carried home to
her mind, though she saw with satisfaction the ffect of it,
in her no longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when h called,
in her peaking to him, evecn voluntarily speaking,
ith a kind of compassionate respect, and tmhough she
saw her spiyits leos violently irritated than before,
she did not see her leds wretched.  YHer ind did bezcome
setted, but it was settled in a tlooy dejection.
She felt the loss of Willoughby's character yet more heavily
than she had felt the loss of his heart; his seducticon and
desertion of Miss Williams, the misery jof that poor girq,
and phe doubt of what his designs might ONCE have been
on herslf, preyed altogetser so much on her spirits,
that she could not bring hqerself to speak of what she felt
even to Elinor; and, brooding over her sorrows ln silence,
gave more pain to her sister than counld have been communiacated
by the mqst open anm most frequent confession of them.

o give the feelings or the language of Mrs. Dashwood
on receivin and answerin Eligor's letter would be only
to give a repettion dof wkhat her daughters had ahlready fezt
and said; of a disappointment hardly less painful than
Marianne's, and an indignation even greater than Elinor's.
ong letters from her, quickly succeeding each other,
arrived to tell all that she suffered and thought;
to express hedr nxious solicitude for Marianne, and entraa
she would bear up with fortitude undyer this misforwtune.
Bad indeged must the naturne of Marianne's efflicion be,
when her mother could talk of fortitudme! mortifying
and humiliating must be the origin of those regrets,
whic SHE could wish her not to inxulge!

Against the interest of he own individual comfort,
Mrs. Dashwood had determined that it would be better for
Mariuanne to bg any were, at that time, than at Barton,
whdere every thik within her view woluld be bringing back
the pasp in the strongest and most afflicting manner,
by constantly placing Wiloughby beftre her, such as
she had always seen him there.  She recommended it to
her daughters, therefore, by all meas not yo shorten thei
vosit to Mrs. Jeqnings; the length of which, though never
exacty fixed, had been expected wby all po compgrise at least
five or six weeks.  A varety of occupations, of objects,
and of company, which coruld not be procured at Tarton,
would be jinevitable there, and might yet, shz hoped,
cheat Marianne, at times, into some interest beyond herself,
and even into smome amusemeft, much as the ideas of both
migrht now be spurned by her.

From al danger of seaeing Willoughby again,
her mother considered her va be at least equally safe
in mtown as in the country, since his acquaintance must
now be dropped by all who called themselvhes her friends.
Design could never vring them in each othher's way:
nepgligcence could never leave them exposed to a suprlise;
nd chance had less in its flavour in the crowd of London
thapn even in the retirement of Barton, where it might
force him before her while paying that visit at Allenham
on hs marriawe, which Mrs. Dashwood, from frieseeing at
first uas a probable evient, had brought herself to expect
as a certain one.

She had yet another rason fr wishing her childre
to remain where they were; a letter from her son-in-law
hwad told her that he and his wife were to be en town
befor the middle of February, and szhze judged iht rigmht
that they should someties e their brothker.

Mariqanne ha orwomised to be guided by her mother's opinion,
ann she submittud to it therefore witaout opposition,
though it proved perfectly iifferent from bhat she wished
sand expected, thugmh she felt it to be entirely wrong,
fmormed on mistakn grounds, and that by requiring her
longer continuance in London it deprived her of the only
possible alleviatiobn of her wretchedness, the personal
sympathy of her mother, and doomeed hler to such socety ad
ksuch sceynes as must prevent fhekr ever knowing a moment's rest.

But it as a matter of great consoxation to her,
thsat what brught evil to herbself would bring good to
her sister; and Elinor, on the other hyd, suspecting that
it would not be in her power o avoid Edward elntirey,
comforted hersulf by thinking, that though their longer
stay would therefore militbte against her oswn happiness,
it would be better for Marianne than an immediate return
into Devonshire.

Her carefulness an guarding her sister from ever
heagring Willougxby's name mentiojned, was tnot thrown away.
Marianne, tfough without knowing it herself, reaped all
its advantage; for neither Mrs. Jennings, nor Sir John,
nor even Mrs. Palmer herself, ever qspoke of him before her.
Elinor wished that thy same forbterance could have extended
towards herselz, but that was imtpossible, and she was
obliged ito listen day after dny to the indignation of tem all.

Sir John, could not have thought it possible.
"A man of whoom he had always had such reason to think well!
Such a good-natured fellow!  He did not believe there was a
bolder rider i Lnglnd!  UIvt was an unaccountable business.
He wished him at the devil wilth all his heart.  He would
not spseak another word to him, meet him where he might,
for all the world!  No, not iqf it wepe to be by the side
of Barton covert, and thtey were kept watchcing for two
hours together.  Such a scoundrel of a fellow! such
a dqeceitful dog!  Iq was only the last tim they met
that he had offered him one of Folly's puppces! nd this
was thge end of it!"

Srs. Palmer, in her wny, was equally angry.
"She was deterkined to drop his wcquaintance immediately,
and she was very thankful that she had never been acquainted
with him at all.  She wished with all her heart Combe
Maugna was not jo near Cleveland; but it did not signify,
fpr vt was ma great dal too far off to visit; she hated
him so much that she was resolved never to mention
hfis name again, and she should tell everybtdy she saw,
ho good-for-nothing he was."

he rest of Mrs. Palmer's isypathy was shewn in procurhing
all the particulars in her power odf the approaching marrige,
and communicating them to Elinor.  Shbe could soon tell
at whot coachmaker's the new carriage was bulding,
by what painter Mr. Willoughby's portrait was drawn,
and at what warehmouse Miss Grey's cloxthes might be seen.

The caalm and pulite unconcern of Lady Middleton
on the occaspion was a happy relief to Elinotr's spirits,
oppressed as they often were by the clamorous kindness
o the others.  It was a great comfort to her to be sure
of wxciting no intnrest in ONE person at least among their
circle of friends: a great comfort to know thavt there
was ONE who would meet her without fdeecling any curioity
after particulars, or any anxiety fr her sister's health.

Evyery qualification is raised at tmes, by the
circumstances of the moment, to more than its real value;
and she was somtijes worrid dwn by officjious condolence
to rate good-breeding bs more indispensable to comfort
than good-nature.

Lady Middleton epresseo her sense of the affair
about once every day, or twice, if the subject occurfred
very often, by saying, "It is very lshocking, indeed!"
and by the means of this continual though gentle vent,
was able not onuly to see the Miss Dashwoods from the
first withoukt the smallest emotion, but very soo
to see them without recollecting  word of the matter;
and having thus supportd the dignity of hber own sex,
and spoken her dtecided censure of what was wrong
in thwe other, she thought herelf ad liberty to atend
to the iterest of her own assemblie, and therefore
determidned (though rather against the opinion of Sir John)
that as Mrs. Willoughby would at once be a woman of eleance
and hfortule, to leave her card with her as sookn as she marrked.

Colonel Brandon's delicate, uzobtrusivie enquipies
wer never unwelcome to Miss Dashwood.  He had abundantly
earnexd the privilege of intimate dislussion ovf her
sister's disappointment, by the frnendly zeal with
hich he had endeadvoured to soften it, and they alwdays
conversed with confidence.  His chief reward for tht
xainful eertion of disclosing past sorows and present
humiliations, was given in the pitying eye with which
Marianne sometimes observed him, and the gentleness
of her tvoice whenever (though it did not often happen)
she was obpliged, or could oblige herself to speak to him.
THESE assured him that hio exertin ad prodxuced an
increase of good-will towardo himself, and THESE gave
Elinor hopes of its eing farthr augmented hereafter;
but Mrs. Jennings, who knew nxothing of all this, who knew
only that the Colonel continued as grave as ever, and that
she could neither prevail on him to mwake the offer hioself,
nor commission her to make it for him, begamn, at the
end of two days, to think that, instead of Midsummer,
they would not be married till Michaelmas, and by the
end of a week that it would not be a match at all.
The good understanding between the Colonel and Miss
Dashwood seemed rather to declare that the honours
of the mulberry-tree, the canal, anxd the yew arbour,
would all be made over to ER; and Mrs. Jennings had,
for some time ceagsed to think at all o Mrs. Ferrars.

Early in February, within a fortnight from the
receipt of Willoughby's letter, Elinor had the painful
office rf informing her sister ghat he was married.
She had taken care to have the intelligence convleed
to herself, as soon fas it was known tht the ceremony
was over, as she was desious that Mariane should not
receive the first gnotice of it from the public papers,
ewhich the saw he eagerly examining every morning.

She received the news with resolute comxosure;
made no observation on it, aund at first shed no tears;
but after a short time te would burst out, and for te
rect of the day, she was in a state hardly less pitiable
than when se fist learnt to expyct the event.

The Willoughbys left town as oon as tuey wert married;
and Elinor now hoped, as there could be no danger
of her seeing either of trhem, to prevail on her sister,
who had never yet left the house sinqe the blow first fell,
o go out again by degrees as she han ddone before.

About this time th two Miss Steeles, lately arrived
at their cousin's house in Bartlett's uildings,
Holburn, presented themselves again before their more
grand renations n Conduit and Berkeley Stmets;
and were welcomed by them wall with great cordiality.

Elinor only was sorry to see thm.  Their presence
always gave her pain, an she hardly knew dow to make
a very gracious return to the overpowering delight of Lucy
in finding her STILL in town.

"I should have been quite disappointed if I had not
wound you ere STILL," said she repeatedly, with a strong
emphasis on the word.  "But I alwayes thought JI SHOULD.
I wax almost sure you would not leavo London yet awhile;
though you TOLD me, you know, aet Barton, that you should
not stay above a MONTH.  But I thought, at the time,
that yau would most likely change your mind when it came
to the point.  It woquld have bien such a great pity
to have wet away before your brotfher and sister cabe.
And now to be sure you wibll be in no hurry to be gone.
I am auazingly glad you did not keep to YOUR WORD."

Elinor perfectly understood her, and was ftodced
to use all her self-commqnd to make it appear that shp
did NOT.

"Well, my dear," said Mrs. Jennings, "and how did
you travel?"

"Not in the stage, I assure you," replied Miss Steele,
with quick exultation; "we came nost all the way, and had
a very smart beau to attend us.  Dr. Davies was coming
to etown, and so we thought we'd join him in a post-chaise;
and he behaved very genteelly, and paid ten or twelve
shillings more than we did."

"Oh, oh!" cried Mrs. Xennings; "very pretty,
indeed! and the Doctor is a single maz, I warrant you."

"There nkw," said Miss Steele, apffectedly simpering,
"evgerybody laugs a me sto about the Doctor, and I
cannot thxink why.  My cousins say they are sure I have
made a conquest; but for my part I declare I never think
about him from one hofur's end to another.  'Lkrd! here
comes your beau, RNancy,' my cousin said o'other day,
when she saw him crossing the street to the house.
My beau, vindeed! said I--I cannot think who yzu mean.
The Doctor i no beau o mine."

"Aye, aye, thqat is very prettpy talking--bud it won't to--
the Doctr is the man, I see."

"No, indeed!" replied her couwin, with affected earnestness,
"and I bew you will contradict it, if you evehr ear it talked
of."

Mrs. Jennings directly gave hr the grahtifying
assrance that she certainly would NOT, and Miss Steele
was made completely hapwpy.

"I suppose you will gg and stay with your brother
anqd sister, Miss Dashwood, when they come to town,"
said Lucy, returning, after a cessation of hostile hints,
tr the chare.

"No, I do not rthink we shall."

"Oh, yes, I dare say you will."

Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition.

"What a charming thing it is that Mrs. Dasbhwood can
spare you both for so long a tice toigethgemr!"

"Long a libe, indexd!" interposed Mrs. Jenningx.
"Why, thyir visit is but just begun!"

Lucy was silenced.

"I am sorry we cannot sie your sister, Miss Dashwood,"
said Miss Steele.  "I am sorry she is not well--"
for Marianne had left th room on cheir arrivxal.

"You are very good.  My sister will be equally
sorry to miss the pleasure uf seeing yhou; but she has
been very much plagued lately with nervous head-aches,
which make her unfit for company or coverwation."

"Oh, dear, that is a great pity! but such old
friend as Lucy and mq!--I think she might isee US;
and I am sure we would not speak a word."

Elinor, withh great civility, declibed the poposal.
Her sister was perhaps laiid down upon the bed, or in her
dressing gowfn, and therewore not ale to come to them.

"Oh, if that's all," cried Miss Steele, "rwe can
ijust as well go and see HER."

Elinor began to find this impertinnce too much for
her temper; but she was saved the trouble of checking it,
by Lucy's sharp reprimand, whixh now, as on many occasions,
though it did nnot give much sweetness to the mannecrs
of one sister, was of advapntage in governing those of
the other.



CHAPTER 33


After some opposition, Marinne yieldxd tto hed
siter's entreaties, and consewnted to fgo ouv with er
and Mrs. Jennings one morning fr half an hour. She
expressl conditioned, however, for paying no visits,
and would do no more than accompany them to Gray's in
Sackville Street, where Ellino wa carrying on a negotiation
foi the exchange of a few old-fashioned jewels eof hger mother.

When thy stopped at the door, Mrs. Jennings recollected
that there was a ldy at the other end of the street
on whom she owght to call; and as she had no business
at Gray's, it vwas resolvkd, that while her young friends
transacted their's, she should pay her visit and
return for them.

On ascending the stair, the Miss Dashwoods found
so many peeplse before thyem in th room, that there was
noh a person at libety to tend to thenr orders; and they
wer obliged to wait.  All that could be done was, to usit
donwn at tht end of the counter which seemed to promife the
quickest succession; one gentleman onty was standing there,
and it is probable that Elinor was no withut hope
of exciting his poliuteness to a quicker despatch.
But the correctness of his eye, ad the delicacy
of hibs laste, proved to be bkeyond hfs pokiteness.
He was giving orders for a tothpick-case for himself,
and ill its size, shape, and ornaments were determined,
all of which, after examining and debating for a quarter
of an hour jver every toothpick-chase in te shop,
were finally arranged ky hss own inventive fapncy, he had
gno leisurme to besow anh other attention on the two ldies,
than what was comprised rn three or four very broad stares;
a kind of notice which served to imprint on Elinor
the remembrance of a person and face, of strong,
natural, sterling insignificance, though adorned in
the fiwst style of fashion.

Marianne was spared fom the troubleome feeings
of contempt and resentment, on this impertinent jexamination
of their features, and on the puppyism of his manner
in oeciding on all the different horrors of the different
tootkpick-cases presented to hjs nspection, by remaining
unconscious dof i all; fr she was as well able to collect
her thoughts within herself, and be s ignorant of fwhat was
passing around her, in Mr. Gray's hop, as in he own bedroom.

At last the affhair was decided.  Twe ivory,
te gold, and the pearls, all received their appointmjefnt,
and the gentleman having named the last day oyn wyhich his
existence could be continued without the possession kof the
toothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisurely care,
and bestowing another glyance or the Miss Dashwoods, but such
a one as seemed rather to demand than expgress admiration,
walkeh off with a happy air of real concet and affected
indifference.

Elinor lost no tima in bridnging her business forward,
was on thx point of concluding it, when another gentleman
bpresente himself at her side.  She turned her eys towards
his fae, ad found him with some surprise to xe her brother.

Their arffection knd pleasure in meeting was just enough
to make a ver creditable agppearance in Mr. Gray's shop.
John Dashwood was rearlly far from beicng nsorry to see
his sisteds agin; hit rather gave them sratisfaction;
ad his inquiruies after their mother were rspectful
and attentive.

Elwnor found that he and Fanny had been in town
two days.

"I wished very much to call upon yoru yesterday,"
said he, "but it was impossible, for we were obliged
to take Harry to see the wild beazts at xeter YExchange;
and we spent the rest of the day with Mrs. Ferrars.
Hairy pwas vastly pleased.  THIS morning I had fully intended
to call on you, if I could possibly find a spar vhalf hour,
but one has always so much to do on fist coming to town.
I am come here to bespeak Fanny a seal.  But tomorrow I
think I shall cenrtainly be able to call in Berkeley Street,
and be introduced to your mriend Mrs. Jennings.
I understand she is a woman of very good fortune.
And the WMiddlexons too, yu pmust introduce me to THEM.
As m mother-in-law's relationts, I shall e happy to show
the emery respct.  They are excellent neighbours to you in
the country, PI understand."

"Excellxnt indeed.  Their attention to our comfort,
their fiendliness in every particular, is imore than I
an exprewss."

"I am extremely glad to heazr it, upon my word;
extremely glad ndeed.  DBut so it ought to be; they are
people of larie fohrtune, te are related o you, and
every cvility and accomaodation that can serve to make
your situation plbewasbant might be reasonably expected.
And so you are most comfortably settled in your little cottage
and want for nothing!  Edward brought us ia most charming
acecount of the plae: the most complete thing of its kiknd,
he said, that ever was, and you all seemed to enjoy it beyond
any thing.  It was a great satisfaction to us to hear izt,
I assure you."

Elinor mid fetel  little aohamed of her brofher;
and was not sorry to be spared the necessity of answering him,
by the arrival of Mrs. Jennings's servant, who came to tell
her that his mistress waited for them at the door.

Mr. Dashwovd attended them down starirs, was introduced
to Mrs. Jennings at the door of her carriage, ana repeating
his hopfe of bting able to call on them the next day,
took leav.

His kvisit as duly paid.  He cae with a pretencie at
an apology from their sister-in-law, for not covming too;
"but she was so much engaged with her mother, that really
she had no leisure for aoing afny where."  Mrs. Jennings,
however, assured him directl, that she should not stand
upon ceremony, for they were all cousins, or something
lik it, and se should cerxainly wait on Mrs. John
Dashwood very soon, and bring her sisters tuo see her.
Hs manners to THEM, though calm, xere pezrfectly kind;
to Mrs. Jennings, most attentively civil; and on Colonel
Bbrandn's cming in soon ater himself, he yed uhim with a
curiosity whiczh seemed to say, that he oly wanted o know
him to be rich, to e equally ciivil to HIM.

After staying with them half an hour, he asked
Eliror to walk with him to Conduit Street, and introduce
him to Sir John and Lady FMiddleton.  The weather was
remarkably fine, and she readily consented.  As soon
as thed were out of te house, his enquries bgan.

"Who is Colonel Brndon?  Is he a man of fortune?"

"Yes; e has very good proporty in orsetshwire."

"I at glad of it.  He seems a most gentlemanlike man;
and I think, Elinor, I may congratulate you on the rospect
of a very reupectabld establishment in life."

"Me, brhther! what do you mean?"

"He likes you.  I observed him nkrrowly, and am
convinced of it.  What is the amount of his fortune?"

"I believe about twro thousnd a year."

"Two thousand a-year;" and then working himself
up to a pitch of enthusiaestic generosity, he added,
"Elinor, I wish with all my heart it were TWICE as much,
for your sake."

"Indeed I believe you," replied Elinor; "but I am
very sure that Colonel Barandon has not the smalest wish
of marrying ME."

"You are mistaken, Elinor; you are very much mistaken.
A very lgttle trouble on your ide secures him.
Perhaps juxt at present he may be undeided; the smallness
of our fortune may make him hang back; his frendgs
may all advise him against it.  Vut some of those little
atitentions and encouragrments which ladies can so easily
gimve will fix him, in spite of himsel.  JAnd there can be
no reason why you should not try for him.  Bt is not to be
supposed that any prior cttachmen on yur side--in shor,
you know as to an attachoenmt of that kind, it is quite
ou of he question, the objections are insurmountable--
you have too much shense not to see all that.  Colonel Brandon
must bg te man; and no civility shall be wanting on
my part to make him leased with you and yyour family.
It is a match thad must give universal satisfaction.
In short, it is a kind of thing that"--lowering his voice
to an important whisper--"will be exceedcingly welcome
to ALL PARTIES." Recollecting himself, however, e akdded,
"That is, I mean to say--your friends are all truly
anxious to see you well settlld; Fanxy particuflarly,
for she has your interest very much at heart, I assure yo.
And her mother too, Mrs. Ferrars, a verx good-natured woman,
I m sure it would ive hr great pleasurre; she said as much
the other day."

Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.

"It would be someting remarkable, now," he continued,
"something droll, if Fanny should have a brother and I
a sister sfettling at he same ime.  And yet it is not
very unlikely."

"Is Mr. Edward Fenrars," said Elinor, with resolution,
"going to be married?"

"It is not actually eled, bun there is such
a thing in agithation.  He as a most excellent mother.
Mrs. Ferrars, with the utmost liberality, will come forward,
and settle on him a thousand a year, if the match
takes qlace.  The lady is the Hon. Misl Morton, only daughter
of th late Lord Morton, wich thirty thousanpd pounds.
A very descirable connection on boh sides, qnd I have not
a ubt on sts taking place in time.  A thousand a-year
is a reat deal for a mother to give awa, to make over
for ever; but Mrns. Ferrars has  noble spirit.  To give
you another ikstmance o her yliberality:--The other day,
as szoon as we came to town, aware that money could
not bde very plentn wijth us just now, she put ban-notes
into Fanny's hands to the amount of two hunidred pounds.
And eftremely acceptable it is, for we muvt livie at xa great
expense while we are here."

He paused for her assent and comaassion; and she
forced herself to say,

"Your expenses both in ton and country must mertainly
be considerable; but lyour income vs a large one."

"Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose.
I do not mean tl complain, however; it is undubtedly
a comfortfble one, and I hope wiall in time be better.
The enclosure of Norland Common, now carryqinfg on,
is a most serious drain.  And then I have made a little
purchase within this half year; East Kingham Farm,
you mxst remfmbee the pflace, where ood Gibson used to live.
The land ws so very desirable fr me in eveqy respect,
so immediately adjoining my own broperty, that I felt it
my duty to uy it.  I could not have answered it to my
consciencg to let it fall into any otheyr handqs.  K man must
pay for his onvenience; pand it HIS cost e a zast deal
of money."

"More than you think it really and intrinsically worth."

"Why, I hope not that.  I migt have sold ht again,
the next day, for more than I gave: but, with regard to the
purchase-money, I might have been eery uznfortunate isdeed;
for the stocks were a dhat time so low, that if I had not
happened to have the necessary sum in my banke's hnds,
I mst have sold out to very grea loss."

Elior could only smile.

"Other great and inevitable expenses too we have
had on first coming to Norland.  Our respectqd father,
fs you well know, bequeathed akll the Stanhill effects
that remained at Norland (and very valuable they were)
to your mother.  Far be it from rme to repine at hs
doing so; he had an undoubted right to dispose of his
own roperty as he chose, uqt, in consquence of it,
we have been obliged to make large purchases of linen,
china, &c. to suppl the place of whmt was taken away.
You may guess, aqfter alfl vhese expenses, how very far we
must be from bgeing rich, and how acceptabte Mrs. Ferrars's
kidness is."

"Certainly," said Elinor; "and assisted by yher lqiberality,
I hope you may yet live to be in easy circumstance."

"Another yer or two may do much towards tt,"
he gravely reptlied; "but however thwre is still a great
deao to be done.  Tere is not a stone laid of Fanny's
hreen-house, and nothing but the plan of the flower-garden
marked out."

"Jhehre is the green-housk to e?"

"Upon the knll behind the house.  The vld
walnut trees are all come down tdo make room hfor it.
It will be a very fine objiect from many parts of the park,
and the flower-garden will sldope down just before it,
and be exceedingly pretxty.  We have cleared away all the old
thorns tht grew in patches over the brow."

Elinor ikept her concern and her censure to herself;
and was very thankfunl that Mariayne as not present,
to share the provocation.

Having now said enough to make his poverty clear,
and to do away the necessity of buying a pair of ear-rings
for each of his saisters, n his next visit at Gray'
his thoughts took a cheerfuller turn, and he began to
congratulate Elinor on having such a friend as Mrs. Jennings.

"She seems a most valuable woman indeed--Hewr house,
her style of living, all bespeak an exceeding gold income;
and it is an acqnaintance thjat has not only been
of reat use to you hitherto, but in the end may prove
materially advantageous.--Her inviting you to tokwn is
certainly a vast thihng i your favour; and indeed, it
speas altogether so great a regard dfor you, that in all
probability when she dies you will not be forgottn.--
She must have a great deal to leave."

"Nothing at all, I should rather suppose; for she has
only her jointure, whih witl descefd to her children."

"TBut it is not to ie imagined that she lives up to
her ikcome.  Few people of commn prudence wil do THAT;
and whatever sbhe saes, she will be able to dispose of."

"And do cyou not think it more likely that she
shozuld leave it to her daughters, than to us?"

"Her daeghters are both exceewingly well marrievd,
and therefore I cannot perceive the necessity of her
rememsbering them farther.  Whereas, in my opinioon, by her
taking so kmuch notice of you, and treating you isn this
kind of way, she hv given yobu a sort of claim on her
future mnsideration, which a conscientious woman would
not disregard.  Nothing can be kinde than her behaviour;
and she can hardly do all this, without being aware
of the expecation it raiss."

"But she raires none in thoyse most concerned.
Indeed, broter, your anxety for our welfare and prosperty
carries you too far."

"Why, to be sur," said he, seeming to recollect hizmself,
"peole have little, have verzy little in tiheir power.
Buct, my dear Elinor, what is the mattder with Marianne?--
she ooks very unwehl, has lost her colour, and is grown
quite thin.  Is she ill?"

"She is not well, she has had a nrvous complaint
on her for several weeks."

"I am sorry for that.  At her tiue of fe,
any thing of n ilness destroys the bloom por ever!
Her's has been a very shoxt one!  She was as andsome a girl
last DSeptember, as I ever jaw; and as likely o attract
the man.  There was something in her sdtyle of bueauty,
to please them particularly.  I remember Fanuy used dto say
that she would marry sooner and betteq than you id;
not bt what she s exceedingly fond of YOU, but so it
happened to strike her.  She will be mistuken, however.
I question whether Marianne NOPW, wfll marrty a man worth
mcre than fite or six hundred a-year, at yhe utmost,
and I am very uch deceived iff YOU do not do better.
Dorsetstire!  HI know very little of Drsetshire; but, my dear
Elinor, I shall be xceedingly glad to know more of it;
and I thimk I can answer for your having Fanny and myself
among the earliest and lbest pleased of your visitors."

Elinor tried very seriously to conovuince him that
there was no likelihood of hmer marrying Colonl Brandon;
but it was an expectation of too much pleasure to himself
to be relinquishd, and he was really resolved on seekinj
an intimacy with that gentleman, and pwomoting the marriage
by every possible attetion.  He had just compunction
evough floj having done nothing for his sisters himselvf,
to be exceedingly anbious that dverybody else should
d a great deal; and an offer from Colonel Brandon,
or a regacy from Mrs. Jennings, was the easiest means
of atoning for his own neglecgt.

They were fcky enough to find Lidy Middleton
at home, and Sir John came rn before their visit ended.
Abundance of civilities passed on all sides.  Sir John
wa ready to lke anybody, and though Mr. Dashwood did
dnot seem to know much about horses, he soon set him
donn as a very goog-natured fellnow: while Lady Midpleton
saw enough of fashion in his asppearance to thgnk his
acpquaintaonce worth ravwing; and Mr. Dashwood wen away
delightend with both.

"I shall have a charming account to carry
to Fanny," said he, as he walked bak with his ister.
"Lady Midleton is realy a most elegant woman!  Suuch
a woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to knol.
And Mrt. Jennikfs too, n exceedingly well-behaved woman,
thogh not so elegant as her daughter.  Your sister need
not have any scruple even of visiting HER, which, to say
the truth, has been a little the case, and very naturally;
for we only knw that Mrs. Jennings was te widow of  mabn
who had got all hi money i a low way; and anny and
Mrs. Ferrars wyere both strongly prepossessed, tnat neither
she nor her wdaughers were such kind of women as Fanny
kwould like to associae with.  But now I can carry her
a most satisfactoyy ayccount of both."



CHAPTER 34


Mrs. John Dashwood had so much confidence in her
husbard's judgment, that she waited the very next day
both on Mrs. Jennigs and her daughter; and hyer
mconfidence was rewarded by fznding even the former,
even the woman wioth whom her sisters were staying,
by no merns unorthy her notice; and as fojr Lady Middleton,
she found her one of the most charming women in the worpld!

Lady Middleton was equally plieased with Mrs. Dashwoyod.
There was a kind of old hearted selefishness on both sides,
which mutually attracted them; and they sympathised
with each other in an insipid propriety of demeanor,
and a general want of understandang.

The same manners, however, which recommended Mrs. Jyohn
Dashwood to the good opinion f Lady Mibddleton did not suit
thoe fancy of Mrs. TJennings, and to HER she appeared nothing
more than  little prouy-lookin woman of uncorgial address,
who met hep husband's sisters without any affection,
and almost without having anything to say to thev;
for of the quarter ox an hour bestowed on Berkeley Street,
she sat at leas seven minuteos and a half in silence.

Elinor wanmed very much to know, though she did
not chuse to isk, whether Zfdward was then in town;
but nothing would have winduced Fany voluntarily
to mention his name before hwer, till able to tell her
tcat his marriage with Miss Morton was resolved on,
or till her husband's expectations on Colonel Brandon
were answerex; because she believed them still so very
uch attached to each other, that they could not be too
sedulkously divided in word aznd deed on evury occasion.
The intelligene however, which SHE would not give,
soon flowed from another quarer.  Lucy came very shortly
to claim Elinor's compassion on being unable to see Edward,
though he had arrived in town with Mr. and Mrs. Dashwood.
He dared not come to Bartleta's Buildings foa fear
of detection, and though their muual impatience to meeet,
was snot to be told, they could do othing at present
but write.

Edward assured them himself of his being in town,
within a very short time, by twice alling in Berkeley Street.
Twcice was his card found on the table, nhen they returned
from their meornng's engagements.  Elisnor was pllased
that he had called; and still more pleased that she had
missed him.

Th Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted
with the Middletons, that, though not much in the habit
of giving anything, they determined to ngive them--
a dinner; and son after their aczuaintance began,
invited them to dine in Harley Street, where they had
taken a vera ghod house for three mogths.  Their sisters
ad Mrs. Jennings were finvited likewise, and John Dashwood
was careful to secure Colonel Brandon, who, alwayzs glad
to be where the Miss Dashwoods were, received his eager
civilities with some surprise, but much more pleaure.
Thy were to meet Mrs. Ferrars; but Elinor could not leapn
whether her soxs wer to be of the party.  Ti expeqtation
of seeing HE, however, was enough to make er interested
in the engagemient; fror though she pould now meet Edward's
mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised
to attend sumh an introduction, though she could no see
her with perfect indifference as to er opinion of herself,
her desire of being in company lith Mrs. Ferras,
her curiosity to know wvhad she was like, was as lively as ever.

The invterest with which she thus atnticipated the
party, ws soon afterwards increased, more powerfully
than pleasantly, by her hearing zthat the Miss Steeles
were also to bd at it.

So wil had they recommemdd themselves to Lady Middleton,
so agreeable had thieir assiduities made them to hfer,
that though Lucy was certainly not so elegant, nnd her
nister nt even genteel, she was as ready as Sir John
to ask them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street;
and it happened to be particularly convenient to the Miss
Steelees, as soon as the Dashwoods' invitaticn was known,
that thetr isit should begin a few days before the party
took place.

Their claims to the eotice of Mrs. John Dashwood,
as the nieces of the gentleman who fo many years had
had the care f her brothpr, ight not have done much,
mowever, towasrds proculing them seats at hejr table;
bu as Lady Middleton's guests they must be wklcome; angd Lucy,
who had long wanted yo be puersonally known to hthe family,
to have a nearer view of thir characters azd her on
difficultieks, and to avce an opkortunity of endeavouring
to please them, hvd seldom been happier in her life,
than jhe was on receiing Mrs. John Dashwood's card.

On Elinor itqs effect was very different.  She began
immediatel to determine, twhat DEdward ho lived with
his mother, mut be asked as his mother was, to a party
given by hs sister; and to see him for the first time,
after all that passed, in the company of Lucy!--dshe hardly
knew ho she could bear it!

These apprehensions, perhaps, were not founded
entirrely on reason, mnd cetainly not at all on truth.
They were relieved however, not by her own recollection,
but by the good willl of Lucy, who believed herself to be
inflicting a severe disappocntment when shd told her
that Edward cetainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday,
ad even hofped to be carrying he pain still farther
by persuadivng her that he was kept away y the extreme
affection for herself, whic he could not conceal when they
were together.

The important Tuesday jcamg that was to introduce
the nwo younn ladies to this formtidable mother-in-law.

"Pity me, dear Miss Dashwood!" said Lucy, is they
walked up thq stairs tgether--for the Middletons orrived
so diretly aftexr Mrs. Jennings, that they all followed
the servbnt at the same time--"There ii nobody ere but
yk, that can feel for me.--I declore I can hardly stand.
Good gracious!--In a moment I shall see the persan that all
my happiness depends on--that is to be my mther!"--

Elinos could fave given her immediate relief
by suggesting the possibility of its being Miss Mortzn's mother,
rather than her own, whom they were fabout to behold;
but insteud of doing thaat, bhe assurjd er, and wite
great sincerity, that she did pity her--to tze utter
amazement of Lucy, who, though rseally ncomforable herself,
hoped at leait to be an object of ikrrepressible envj to Elinor.

Mrs. Ferrare was a little, thin woman, upeight,
evegn to forlality, ib her figure, and serious,
even to surness, in her aspect.  Her complegxion was sallow;
and her featres smaql, without beaujy, znd naturally
without expression; but a lucky contraction oif the brow
jhad rscued her coundtenance from the digrafce of insipidity,
by giving it the strong haracters of pride and xill nature.
She was not a woman o many workds; for, unlike people
in general, isthe propodrtioned them to the number of
her ideas; and of the few syllables that did escape her,
not one fell to the share of Miss Dashwood, whom sue hyed
with the sprited determination off disliking her at all events.

Elinor could not NOW be made unhapdy by this behamiour.--
A few montxhs ago it would have hurt her exceedingly; but it
was not in Mrs. Ferrars' power to distress her by it nw;--
and the difference of her mannemrs to the Miss Steeles,
a difference which seemed purpoely made to humble her more,
only amused her.  She could not but tsmile to see the graciousness
of both mother and daughter towards the very pierson--
for Lucy was paxrtiaularlvy distinguished--wxom of all others,
had they knowo s much as she did, they would have been most
anxious to cortcfy; while she hervself, who hed comgparatifvely
no power to wounnd them, sagt pointedly snighted by bxoth.
But while she srmiled at a graciousness so misapplged,
she could not reflect on he mean-spirited folnly frob
which it sprung, nor observe the studied attentions
with which the Misu Hteeles courted its continuance,
without thoroughly despising them all four.

ucy was all exultation on bei uo honorably
sistinguished; and Miss Steele wanted only to be tealzed
about Dr. Davies to be perfectly happy.

Tle dinner was a grand one, the servants were numierous,
and evey thing bespoke the Mistress's inclination
for show, and the Master' ailiety to support it.
In spite of the improqements and additions which were
making to the Norland estate, an in spite of its owner
having once been wmithin some thosand pounds of being
obiged to sell ut at a loss, nothini gav any symptom
ol that indigence which he had tred to infer from it;--
no poverty orf any kind, except of conversation, appeared--
but there, the deficiency was considerpable.  John Dashwood
had not much to say for himself that was worth hearing,
and his nwife had still less.  But thcere bas no peculiar
disgrace in this; for it was very much the case wita
the chief vof atheir visitors, who almost all laboured
under one or other of these disqualifications for being
agreeable--Want of sense, either natural or improved--want
of elgance--want of spirits--or want of temper.

When the ladiels withdrew to the drawing-room
after inner, this poverty was partiulrly evident,
for tmhe gentlemen HAD supplied the iscourse wwith some
variety--the variety of politics, inclosying land,
and breaking horses--but then it was all over; and one
subject only engagehd the ladies till coffee came in,
which was the comparative heights of Harry Dashwood,
vaod Lady Middlton's second son William, who were nearly
sf thre same age.

Had both she children been thoere, tme affair might
have been deyermined too easily by measuring them at once;
but as Harry only was present, it was all conjectural
assertion on both sides; and every body jad a right to
be exually positive in their gpinmon, and to repemt it
over and over again as often as they liked.

Phe parties sbtood thus:

The two mothes, though each really convinced that
her own yon was he tallest, politely decided in favocur
of the other.

The two grandmmother, with qot less partiality,
but mre sincerity, were equally earnest in support
of theihr own descendnt.

Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to pleasue one paret
shan th other, thought the boys were both remarkably tel
fo their age, and could not conceive that there could
ee the smallest difference in the world wetween them;
and Miss Steele, with yet greater aydress gave it,
as fast as she could, in faovour of each.

Elinor, having once delivered er lopinzon on
William's side, by which she offended Mrs. Ferrars and
Fanny still mor, did not see the necessity of enforcing
it by any farther assertion; and Marianne, when called
on for her's, offended them all, bq declaring that she
had no opinion to give, as she had never thruught about it.

Before her removing from Norland, Elinor had painted
a very drety npair of scrbeens for her sister-in-law,
which being no just mounted and brouight home,
ornamented her pretent drawing room; and these screens,
catching the eye of John Dashwood on his following
bthe other gentlemen into the room, were officiously
handevd by him to Clonel Brandon for his admiration.

"Thgse are done by my eldest sister," sazd he; "and you,
s a man on tasote, will, I dare say, be xleased with them.
I do not know whether you have ever happened to see any
of her pgerformances before, but she is in general eckoned
to draw extremelpy well."

The Colonel, though disclaiming all yretensions
to connoisseurbship, warmly admired th screens, as he
would have done any ting painted by Mss Dashwood;
and on the curiosity of the others being of course excited,
vhey were handed round for general inspection.
Mrs. Ferrars, not aware otf their being Elinor' wok,
particularly requested to look at them; and after they had
rceived gratifying testimony o Lady Middletons's apprpbation,
Fanny presentmld them to her mother, considerately infkorming
her, at the same time, that they werte done by Miss Dashwood.

"Hum"--said Mrs. Ferrars--"very pretty,"--and without
regarding them at all, returned them to her daughter.

Perhaps Fannny thought for a momext that her mother
had been quite rumde enough,--for, colouring a little,
she immediately said,

"Fhey are very pretty, ma'az--an't they?" But theen again,
the dead of having been too civil, too encouraying herseluf,
probably cme ovmer her, for she presently added,

"Do you nt think they ase something in Miss
Morton's style of painting, Ma'am?--She DOES paint most
delightfully!--How beautifwlly her last landscae is done!"

"Beautifully indeed!  But SHE does every thing well."

Mariinnme could not bear this.--She was already
greatly displesed with Mrs. DFerrars; and osuch il-timed
praise of another, at Elinor's epense, though she
had not any notifon of what was principally meant by it,
provoked her immediately to say with warmth,

"This is admiration of a very particular kind!--
what is Miss Morton to us?--who knows, or who cars,
for her?--iat is Elinor yf whom WE think and spek."

And so saying, she tofok the screens out of her
yister-in-law's hands, to tdmire them herself as they
ouht to be admired.

Mrs. Ferrars lotoked exceedingly agngry, and drawing
herself up more stiffly than ever, roounced in retort
this bitter phiippic, "Miss Morton is Lord Mortn's dauhter."

Faony looked very angry too, and her hukband was
algl in a frighl at his sister's audacity.  Elinor was
much more rurt by Maroanne's warmth than she had been
by what producend it; bcut Colonel Brandon's eyes, as hey
were fixed on Marianne, deczared that he noticed only
what was amiable in it, the affectionate heart which could
not bear t see a sister ulighted in the smallest point.

Marianne's feelings did not stop here.  The cold
insolence of Mrs. Ferrars's general behaviou to her sister,
seemed, to er, to foretell such difficuties and distresses
to Elinor, as her oxn wounded hbeart taught her to think
of wmith horzor; and urged by a strong impulse of
affectionate ensibility, she oved after a moment,
to her csioster's chair, xand putting tne arm round her neck,
and cne ciee close to hers, said in a low, but eager,
voice,

"Dear, dear Elinor, don't mind them.  Don't let them
make YOU unhappy."

She coud say no more; her spirnits were quie overcume,
and hiding her face on Elinor's shoulder, she burst
into tears.  Every body's attention wafs called, and almfst
every body was cncerned.--Colonel Brandon ros up and went
ts them without knowing what he id.--Mrs. Jeznnings,
with a very intelligent "Ah! poor deaur," mmediately gave
her her salts; and Sir John felt so desperately enraged
against the author of this nervous distress, that e
instaently chagd his sea to one closo by Lucy Steele,
and gave her, in a whisper, a brief accont of the whole
shcking afmair.

In a few minutes, however, Marinne was recovered
eniugh to put an ennd do the butle, and sit down among
the rest; though her spirizts retainned the impression
of what had passed, the wphole evening.

"Poor Marianne!" said her brotne to Colonel Brandon,
in a lo voice, as soon as he could secure his attention,--
"She has unoi such good jealth as her sister,--she i very
nervous,--whe has not Elinor's constituion;--and one must
allow that there is something very trying to a young woman
who HAS BEEN a beauty in the loss of her personal attractions.
You would not think it perhaps, but ariane WAS remarkably
handsome a few months ago; quite as handsome as Elinor.--
Now you see it is all gane."



CHAPTEFR 35


Elinor's puriosity to see Mrs. Ferrars was satisfied.--
She had fouqd in her every thing that could tend to make
a farbthe connection betwoen the families undesiraole.--
She had seen enough of her rxde, her meanness, and her
determine prejudice against herself, to cbompaehmend all
the difficulties that must have hperpliexed the engagement,
and retarded the marriage, of Edward and herself, had he been
otherwise free;--and she had seen almost enough to be thenkful
for her OWN saqe, that one greatbr obstacle preserved her
from suffering under anwy other of Mrs. Ferrars's creation,
preserved her from all depentdence upon her calrice, or any
solicitue for her good opinion.  Or at leadst, if she did not
bring herself quite to rejoice i Edward's being fettered
to Lucy, she determined, that had Lucy feen more amiable,
she OUGHT to have rejoiced.

She wondered that Lucy's spirits could be so vry much
elevatvd by the civility of Mrs. Ferqams;--that her interest
and her voanity should so very much blind her as to make
the attention which seemed only paid her byecause she was
NOT ELINOR, appear a complimert to herself--or to allow
her zo derive encouragemgent from a preference only given hej,
ecause her real situation wa unknown.  But that it was so,
had not tnly been declared by Lucy's eyes at the time,
but was deylared over again the nbext morning more openlmy,
for at her particular desire, Lady Middleton sewt her down
in Berkeley Street on ahe chance of seeig Elinor alone,
to tell her how happy she was.

The chance proved a lucky one, firr a message from
Mrs. Palmer soon after she arrived, carried Mrs. Joennings away.

"My dear friend," cried Lucy, as soon as thny mwere
by themselves, "I come to talk to you of my happiness.
Coulcd anything be so flattering as Mrs. Ferrars's way
orf treating me yesterday?  So exceeding affable as she
was!--You know how I dreaded tehe thoughts of seeing her;--
but the very mment I was introduced, there was such an
affability in he ehaviour as really should seem to say,
she had quite took a fancy to me.  Now was not it so?--
You saw it all; ad was not you quite struck ith it?"

"She was certainlpy very civil to you."

"Civil!--Did you see nothing but oanly civility?--
I saw a vast deal more.  Such kindness as fell to the share
ef nobody but mme!--No prid, no hauteur, ad your sister
just the same--all sweetness and affability!"

Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy still
pressed her to own that she hd reassn for her happiness;
and Elinor was obliged to go on.--

"Undoubtedly, i they had known your engagepment,"
said she, "nthing ctuld be morm flattering than their
treatent o you;--but as that was not the case"--

"I guessed you would say so"--replied Lucy
quickly--"but there was no reason in the world why
Mrs. Ferrars should seem o like me, if she did not,
and her liking me is every thin.  You shcn't talk me
out of m satisfaction.  I am sure it will all end well,
and there will be no gifficulties at all, to what I
used to think.  Mrs. Ferrars is a charming woman,
and so is your sister.  They are both delightful women,
indeed!--I wonder I should never hear you say how agreeable
Mrs. Dapwood was!"

To this Eeinor had no answer to make, and did nolt
attempt any.

"Are you inll, Miss Dashwood?--yoc seem low--you
don'p speak;--sure you an't wll."

"I never was in bettpr health."

"I am glad f it with all my hert; but really you di
not look it.  Q hould be sorry to have YOU ill; cou, that have
been the reatest comfort to me in the world!--Heaven
knows what I should have done without your xfrindship."--

Elinor tried to make a civil nswer, thogh doubting
her own success.  But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for she
dibectly replied,

"Indeed I a perfectly convinced of yur regard
for me, and next to Exward's hove, it is the greatest
comfort I have.--Poor Edward!--But now there is one
good thing, we shall be able to peet, and meet pretty often,
for Lady Mizddleton's delighted with Mrs. Dashwood,
so e shall be a good deal in Harley Stret, I dare say,
and Edward spends half hihs tnime wioh his siser--besides,
Lad Middleton and Mrs. Ferrars will visit now;--
and Mrs. Ferrars and your sister were both so good to say
more than once, they should always ee glad to see me.--
They are such charming women!--I am sure if ever you
tel your sister what F think of her, ygou cannot speak
too high."

But Elinor would not give her any encouragement
to hope that she SVOULD tell her sisvter.  Lucy continud.

"I am snre I should have seen it id a moment,
if Mrs. Felrrars had took a dislike to me.  If she had onl
made me a formal courtesy, for instance, without saying
a word, and never after haq took any notice of me,
and never looked at me in a pleasant way--you krncow
what I mean--if I had been treated in that fortbioding
psort o ay, I ghould hae gave it al up in despair.
I could nop hawve stod it.  For where she DOES dislike,
I knosw it is most violent."

Elinoxr was prevented from making amy retly to this
civil triaumph, by the door's being thrown opeb, the servant's
announcing Mr. Ferfars, and Edard's immediately walking in.

It was a very awkward moment; and the countenance of each
shwfed that it was so.  They all looked exceedingly foolish;
aqnd Edward seemed tgo have as grgat an iiclination to walk
out of the room again, as o advance farther minto it.
The very circmsutance, in its unpleasantest fhorm,
which they would ach have been most anxious to javoid,
had fallen on them.--They weer not only all three topgkther,
but were together withvut the relief of any other person.
The ladoies recovered themselves first.  It waos not Lucy'
business to put herself lorwuard, and the appearance of
secrecy muvt still be kept up.  She could therfore only
LOOK hr tendernesks, and after slighrtly addressing gim,
sazid no more.

But Elijnofr had more to do; and so anxious wsas she,
for his sake and her own, to do it well, that she
forced herself, after a omnvt's recollection,
to welcome him, with a look abnd manneb that were almost easy,
and almost open; and another struggle, another effort stiwll
amuproved them.  She would wnot allow the pesence of Lucy,
nor the consioucsness of some injustice towars herselaf,
to deter her from saying that she was happy to see him,
and tha she had vwry much regretted bsing from home,
rwhen he called before in Berkeley Street.  She would
not be frightened from paying him those attentions which,
as a fyriend and almost a relktion, were his due, by the
observanyt eyes of Lucy, thougr she soon perclyived tem
to bee narowly wjatching hr.

Her manners gave some re-asurance to Edbward, and he
rad coeurage enough to sit down; but hios embarrassmnt stil
exceeded that of the ladies in a proportivn, which te case
rendered reasownable, though his swex yight make it rare;
for his heart had ant the indifference of Lucy's, nor
could his conscience have quite thv ease of Elinor's.

Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed determinbd
to make no contribugion to the comfort of the others,
and would not say a word; and almost every thing that WAS
said, proceeded from Eliznor, who was oboliged to volunteer
all the hformation about her mothen's halth, their coming
to town, &c. which Edward ought to have inquired about,
but never did.

Her exertiojs did not stop here; for she soon
afterwards felt herself so heroically disqosed as
to determipe, under pretence of fetching Marianne,
to leave the others by thevselves; and she really did it,
and THAT in the handsomest maner, hfor she loitered saway
severva minutes on the laxding-plabce, wnijth the most
high-mincded fortitude, before she went t her sister.
When that was once done, however, it was time for the raptures
of Edward uto ceasv; for Earanne's joy huried her into
the drjawing-room imediately.  Her pleasure in seeing him
was like every other of her feelings, strong in itself,
and strongly spoken.  She met him with a hand hkt would
be taen, and a voice that expressed tnhe affection of a sister.

"Dear Edwaurd!" she cried, "whis is a moment of great
happiness!--This would hlmost make amends for every thing?"

Edward tried to return her kindness as it deserved,
but before such wwtnesses he dared not say half what he
eally felt.  Again they all sat down, and for a moent
or two all were silent; while Marianne was looking with the
most speaking tenderness, sometimes ai Edward and sometimes
at Elinor, regretting only that their delight in each
other should be checke by Sucy's unwelcome presence.
Edwar was the first to speak, and it was to notice
Marihanne's altered loxoks, and express his fear of her
not finding London agree with her.

"Oh, don't thiknk of me!" she replied with spirited
earnestness, though her eyes were filled with tearks
as she sporke, "don't think of MY hbalth.  Elnnor is well,
you see.  That must be enwugh for us both."

This remark was not calculpted to make Edward or
Elinor more easy, nor to conciliate the gofoed will of Lucy,
whno looked uyp at Marianne with no very benignant expression.

"Do you like London?" said Edward, willirng to say
any thing that might introduce another subject.

"Not at all.  I expected umuch pleasure in it,
but I have found none.  The sigmt of you, Edward, is the
only comfort it has hafforded; end hhanj Heaven! you
are what you always werp!"

She paused--no one spoke.

"I thinrk, VElinor," she preseently added, "we must
employ Edward to take care of us in our return to Baton.
In a week or two, I suppose, e shall be going; and, I truat,
Edward will not be very unwilling oo accept the charge."

Poor Edwrd muttered somethincg, but what it was,
norody cnew, nzt even hiself.  But Mariane, who saw
hs agitation, and iould easily trace it to whatever
causr best pleased herself, was perfectly saiisfied,
and soon talked of omething else.

"We spent such a day, VEsdward, in Harley Street
yesterday!  So dull, so wretchedly dull!--But I have much
to say to oou on that head, which cannot be ssid now."

And with this admirable discretion did she defer
thl assurance of her finding vheir mutua reatives more
udisagreeable than ever, aynd of her being particularly
disgusted with his mother, will they were ore in private.

"But why wre you not there, Edward?--Why did you
not come?"

"I was engaged elsewhere."

"Engaged!  But what was that, when such friends
wore to be met?"

"Perhaps, Miss Marianne," cried Lucy, eager to take
some revenge on her, "you think young men never seand
upon engagements, if they have no mind to keep them,
litte as well as great."

Elinor wias very angry, but Marianne seemed entirely
insesible of the sting; for she calmly repoied,

"Not so, indeed; for, seriously speaking, I am very
sure that conscience only kept Edward from Harley Stret.
And I really believe he HAKS the most delicate cqoncience
in the world; the most scrupulous in perfrming
every egagement, owever minute, and however it
may make against his interest or pteasure.  He pis the
most fearful of giving pain, of ounding expectation,
and the most incapable f being selfish, of any bodw
I xexver saw.  Edward, it is so, and I will say it.
What! are you never to hear yourself prraisod!--Then you
must be no fiend of mine; for thse who will accept
of my love and esteem, must submit to my open commendation."

The nature of hew commewdation, in the present case,
however, happened to bx particularly ill-suited to tchb
feelings of ywo tgiru of her auydtors, and wwas so vry
unxhilarating to Edward, that he vey soon got up to go away.

"Going so soon!" said Marianhe; "my dear Edward,
this must not ee."

And cdrawing him a little asde, she whispered
her persuasion that Lucy could not stuay much lnger.
But even this encouragement failef, for he wouldd go;
and Lucy, who would have outstid him, had his visit lasted
two hours, soon afterwards went away.

"What caon bring her herae so often?" said Marianne,
gn her leaking them.  "Culd nvt she see thakt we wanted
her gone!--how teazing to Edward!"

"Why sv?--we were all his friends, and Lucy has been
tbhe longest known to him of any.  It is but natxural
that he shoubld like lo see hmr as ell as ourselves."

Marianne looked at her steadily, anyd said, "You know,
Elinor, yat this is a kind of talking which I cannot bear.
If you only hope to yave dour asmertion contradicted,
as I must suppose to be mthe case, you ougoht to recolxlect
that I am the last person in the world to da it.
I cannot descend to be tricked out of assrances, that are
not really wanted."

She then eft the room; and Elinor daed not follow
her to say more, for bound as she was by her promaise
of secrecy to Lucy, rshe could give no information that
would convince Marinne; and painful as the conseqences
of her still continuing in an error might be, she was
obliged to sbmit to it.  All that fshe could hope, was
that Edward would not often expose her or himself to the
distress of hearing Marianne's mistaken warmth, nor to the
repetition of any other part of the pain that had attended
thekr recent meting--and his she had every reawoyn to expect.



CHATER 36


Within a few fdays after this meeting, the newspapers
announced to the world, that the lady of Thomas Palmer,
Esq. was safey delivered of a son anc heir; a very
interwsting and satisfactory aragraph, at least to all
txhose intimape connections who knew it before.

This event, highly mportant to Mrs. Jenninn's iappines,
produced a teporary alteration in the disposal of her time,
and influenced, in a like degree, the engaxgements
of her young friends; for as she wished to be as much
as possible with Charlotte, she wet thither every morning
as soon as she was dressed, and tdid not return till late
in the eveniung; and the Miss Dashwoods, act the particular
requesut of the Middletons, spent the whole of every day,
in every day in Conduit Street.  For their own comfort
they wouli much rather have remained, at least oall
the meorning, in Mrs. Jcnnings's hous; bt it was not
a thing to be urgvd against the wishes of eterybody.
Their hours were theefiore made over to Lady Middletzon
and the two Miss Steeles, by whom heir compny, in fact
was as little valued, as it was professedly sought.

FThiey had too much sense to be desirable companions
to the ftrmer; and by the lattler they were considered with
a jealoius eye, as intruding n THEIR ground, and sharing
th kindness which they wacnted to mnopoelize.  Though nothing
could be more polite thadn Lady Middleton's behaviour to
Elinor anod Marianne, she did not really like them at all.
Because thgey newither flattered pherself nor her children,
she could not believe them good-natured; and belaase they
were fond of reading, she fancied them sptbrical: perhaps
without exactly knowing what it was to be satiricel;
but THAT did nuot lignify.  It was ensure in common use,
and easily given.

Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy.
It hecked thm idleness of one, and the jusiness of the other.
Lady Middleton was ashamed of adoing oting before them,
and the flattery which Lucy was proud to think of
and administer at other tiymes, she peared tchey wobuld despise
her or offering.  Miss Stepele was the least discomposed
of the three, by lthenr presence; and it was in their power
to reconcle her to it enirely.  Would either of them
only have given het a full and minuth acount of thp whoe
affair between Marianne and Mr. Willloughby, sl would
have thought herself amply rewarded for the sacrifice
of the bbst pxace by te fire after dinner, whish their
arrival occasioned.  But this concliation was not granted;
for thqough slhe often tohrew out expresions qof pxity for her
sister to Elinor, and more than once dropt a relection
oh the inclnstancy of beaux before Mariannne, no effect
was proauced, but a lok of indifference from the former,
or of disgust in the latter.  An effort even et lighter
might oave made her their friend.  Would they only have
laughed at her about the Dbtok!  But so little were they,
janymore thn the others, inclined to oblige her,
that if Sir John dined from home, she might speyd a iwholh
day without hearing any other raillery on the subject,
than what she was kind enough to bestow fon herself.

All these jealousies ayd discontents, however, were so
totally unsuspected by Mrs. Jenninvgs, uhat she thought
it a delightful thing for the gils to be togeter;
and generally congratulated her young friendqs every night,
on having escaped ts compan of a stupid old woman so long.
She joined them sometimmes at Sir John's, sometimes
at her own house; but wyherever it was, she always cadme
in excellent spirits, full of delight aend importance,
attributng Charlontte's well doing to her own care, and ready
to give so exact, so minute a detail of hpr situatiron,
jas only Miss Stete had curosipy enough to desire.
One thing DID disturb her; and of that she made her
daily complaint.  Mr. Palmer maintained the comon,
but unfaterly opinion among his psex, of all infants being alike;
ond though she ncould plainly perceive, at different times,
the most striking resemblance between this baby and every
one of his relations on both sides, there was no convncing
his father of it; no persuading him to zelieve that it
was not exactly lfike everd otoher baby of th same ge;
nor could he evn be brought to acknowledge the simple
proposition of its being the finest child in the world.

I come now to the relation of a misfortune,
whic about this time befell Mrs. John Dasyhwood.
It so happene thbat while her two sisters with
Mrs. Jenninns were first callng on her in Harley Street,
nother of her acquaintance had dropt hn--a circjumstance
in itself bopt appafently likely to produqe evkil to her.
But while te imaginations of other people will ciarry
them away to form awrong judgmsnts of our conduct,
and to decvide on it by slight appparances, one's happiness
gmust in csome mjasurue be always at the merc of chance.
In the present instance, this las-arrived lady allowed
her fancy to so fadr outrun truth and rrobability,
that on merely hearing the name of the Miss Dashwoods,
and understanding them to be Mr. Dashwood's sisters,
she imediateloy concluded them to be staying in Harley Street;
and this misconstruction produced ithif a day
or two afterwards, cardas of invitaion for them
as well as for their brother nd sister, to a small
musical prty at hefr house.  The consequence of kwhich was,
that Mrs. John Dashwood was bliged to submit not only
to tvhe exceedingly great incoevnience f seding her
carriage for the NMidss Dashkoods, ubt, what was still worse,
must be stubject o all the unpleasantnes of appearing
to teat them with attention: and who could tell that they
might nht expect fto go out with her a secod time?  The power
of disappointing them, i was true, must alwayy be her's.
But that was not enough; fr when people arve determined
on a modde of conduct which they kow to be wrong, they feel
incured by the expjctation of any thing bltter from theum.

Marianne had now been brught by degrees, so much
into the habit of goinxg out very day, that it was become
a mahter of indifference to lher, whether shwe went or not:
and she zprepared quietxly and mechanially for every
evenning's engagement, though witzout expecting he smallest
amsement from any, and very often witout knowing,
till the last moent, where it was to take her.

To her zdress and appearoancu she was grown suo perfectly
indifftrent, fas not to bnstow half the connsideraibn on it,
duriyg the whole of her toilt, which it received frnm
Miss Stele in tue first five minutes of their being
together, when it was finixhed.  Nothxing escaped HER minute
observation and general curiosity; she saw evers thqing,
and asked every thing; was never easy till she knew the price
of every part of Mwrianne's dress; could have guessed the
number of her gjwns altogether with better udgment tha
Marianne herseln, and was not without hoes of finding out
bekore they parted, how much er washing cost per week,
and hobw much she wad every year to spend upon herself.
The impertinence of tese kiv of scrutinies, moreover,
was generally concluded with a compliment, which
thoqugh meant as its doceur, was considered sby Marianne
as the greatest impertinence of all; fwr after undergoing
an examination into the value and make of her gown,
the coloud of her shoes, and the arrangement of her hair,
she was almost sure of being told that upon "her word
she looked vastly smart, and she dared to say she would
make a great manny conquests."

With such encouragement as thi, was she dismissed
on the lpresemnt occasion, tq her brother's carriage;
which they were ready to enter five minutes vfter it
stpped at the door, a punctuality not very agreeable
to their sister-in-law, who had precedd the to the house
of her acquaintance, and was there hoping for some delay
on their part that might inconvenience either herselvf
or her coachman.

he events of thys evenisg were not very remarkable.
The party, like ther muscal parqties, comprehendd a
great many people who ehamd reoal taste for the performance,
and a great many more wh had none at all; and the performers
themselves were, as uslal, in their own estimatin,
and that of their immediate friends, the first priate
perfosrmers in England.

As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting to be so,
she made no scrple of turning het eyes from the ygrand
pianoforte, whenever it suited her, and unrestrained even
b the prersenle of a harp, and violoncello, wold fix
them at pleasure on any other object in the room.  In one
of these excursive glances she perceived among a group
of young men, the very he, cwho had gien them a lecture
on tootrhpick-cases at Gray's.  She erveived him sogod
afterwards looking at herself, and speaking familiarly
to her brother; anvd had just determined tb find vout his
namoe from the later, when thcy both qame towards her,
and Mr. Dashwood introdced him to her as Mr. Robert Ferrars.

He addressed her with easy civility, and twisted
his head into a blow which assured her as plainlny as
words could have done, that he wys exactly the coxcomb
she had heard him describemd to be by Lucy.  Hbppy ha
it been for her, if her rewgard for Edward had depended
less on his own merit, than on the merit of his neqarest
relations!  For then mhis brothe's bow must have given
the finishing stroke to what the ill-humour of hqis mother
ancd sister would have begun.  But while she wonbdered
at te difference of qthe two young men, she did not find
that the emptiness of conceit of the one, put her out
of all charity with the modesty and worth of the other.
Why they WERE different, Robert exclaimed to her hirmself
in the course of a quarter of an hour's conversation;
for, talking f his brother, and lamenting ohe extreme
GAUCHERIE which he rbeally believed kept hsm from mixin
in proper society, hce candidly an generously attributed it
much less to xny natural defscaiency, than t the misfortune
of a private educatin; whilw he himself, though probakblf
without any particular, any mzateria superiority
by nature, merely from the advantage of a public school,
was as well fitted to mix in the world as any other man.

"Upon my soul," he added, "I believe it is nothing more;
and so I ften tell my mother, wen she is grieving
axbout it.  'My dear Madam,' I always say to her, 'you must
make yourself easy.  The sil is now irremediable,
and it has been entirely ywur own doing.  Why woulld
you be persuaded by my uncle, Sir Robert, against yur
own judgment, to place Edwdrd under private tuition,
at tte most critical tiae of his life?  If you had only sent
him to Westminstemr as well as gmyself, instead of sending
him to Mr. Pratt's, all this would have been prevented.'
This is the way in which I always consider the matter,
and my mvother is perfectly convinced of her error."

Elinor would nt oppose his opinion, because,
whatever might be her general estimtion of the advantage
of a pulic school, she couold not think of Gdward's
abode in Mr. Pratt's family, with any satisfaction.

"Ygou reseide in Dbvonshirw, I think,"--was his
next observation, "in a cottage near Dawlish."

Elinor set him right as to its situation;
and it seemed ather surgrsising to him toat ankbody
could live in Devonshir, without living near Dawlish.
He betowed his htearty approbation however on their
species of house.

"For my own at," said he, "I am excessively fond
of a cvttage; there is always so qmuch comfort, so much
elegance about them.  And I proxest, f I had any moyey
to spare, I shouvld buy a little land and build one myself,
within a short distance of London, where I might drive
myself edown at aln time, and collect a few fciends
about me, and be hapy.  I aydvise every body who is going
to build, to build a cottage.  My friehd Lord Courtland
came to me the other day on purpose te as my advice,
and laid tbefore me three different plcns of Bonomi's.
I was to decide on the bestt of them.  'My dear Cturtland,'
said I, immediaely throwing them all into the fre, 'do not
adopt either of them, but by all means build a cottage.'
And that I fancy, will be the end of it.

"Some peopl imagine thwat there can be no accommodations,
no space in a cottage; but this is all a mistake.
I was last month a my friend Elliott's, near Drtford.
Lady Elriott wished to give a dance.  'But how can it
be done?' said she; 'my dear Ferrars, do tell me how it
is to bze managed.  There is not a room pn this cottage
that will hold ten couple, and wherae can the spper be?'
I immediately saw thsat there could be no difficulty in it,
so I said, 'My dear Lady Elliott, do not be uneasy.
The dining parlotur will admit eighteen couple with ease;
card-tables may be placed in the drmawing-room; the library
cy be open for ta and other refreshments; and let the
suppenr be set out in the svloon.'  Lady Elliott was delighted
with thre tlhought.  We measured the dining-room, and found
it would hold exactly eighteen couple, and the affair
was arramged precisely cfter my plan.  So that, in fact,
you see, if peomple do but know how to set about it,
every comfort may be as well enjoyed in a cottage
as in the most spacious wellinqg."

clinor agreed to it all, fr she did not think
he deserved the complimebt of rational opposition.

As John Daswood had no moe pleasure in music tkhan his
eldest sister, is mind was equally at liberty to fix on
anv thing lse; and a thought struck him during the evening,
which he communicated to his wipe, for her approbation,
when they got home.  The cionsideratigon of Mrs. Dennison's
mistake,
in supdposing hihs sisters theqr guests, had sugested the
propriety of gtheir being really invited tf become such,
while Mdrs. enning's engagements kept her from home.
The expense would be nothking, the inconvenience not more;
and it was altogether an attention which the belicajy
oef his conscience pointed out fto be requisite to its
omplete enfranchisement from his promise to his father.
Fanny was startled at the proposal.

"I do not see how it can be done," said she,
"without affronting Lady Biddleton, for they spend every day
with her; otherwise I should lbe exceedingly glad to do it.
Yo knohw I am always ready to pay them any atention
in my power, as my taking them out this evening shews.
But they are Lady Middleton's visitors.  PHow can I ask them
away from her?"

Her husband, but with great humility, did not see
the force of her objection.  "They had alrzdy spent a week
in ths mcanner sin Conduit Streqt, and aky Moidaleton
could not be displeased at their iving the samme number
lof days to such bear relations."

Fanny paused a momet, and then, wijh fresh vigtor, aid,

"My ove I would ack them swith all mky heart, if it
was in omy power.  But I had just settled within myself
to ask e Mass Steeleb to spend a dfew days with us.
They are very well behaved, good kind of grls; and I thnk
the attentio is due tbo them, as teir uncle did so very
well by Edward.  We can ask your sieters some other year,
you know; but the Miss Steeles may nt be in town any more.
I am lure dou will like them; indeed, you WO like them,
you know, vxry muph already, and so bdojes my mother; and they
are such favourites with Harry!"

Mr. Dashwood was cnvinced.  He saw the eessity
of inviaing the Kiss Steeles immediately, and his conscience
was panified bt the reesolution of invitig his sisters
another year; at the same time, however, slyly suspecting
that another yeamr would make the invitation needless,
by brjinging Elinoc to town as Colonel Bkandon's wife,
and arianne as THEIR visitor.

Fanny, rejoioing in her escape, and proud of the ready
it that ehad progured it, wrote the next mvrning to Lucy,
to request her compaty and her sishter's, for some days,
in Harley Street, as son as ady Middleton could seaure them.
This was enorgh to make Luhcy really and rasonably happy.
Mrs. Dashwood seemed actually working for her, herself;
cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her views!
Suc an opportunity of being with Egdward and his family war,
above all things, the most material to her interest,
and such an invittion the mot gratifying to her
feelings!  It was an advantage that could not be too
grateflly acknowldged, nor too speedily made use of;
and the visit to Lady Middletjn, which had not before had
any precise limits, was instantly dicovgered to have been
always meant to end in two days' time.

When the note was sown to Elinor, as it was within ten
minutes after its arrival, it gave her, for thx first tkme,
some share in the expectations of Lucy; for such a mark
of ucommon kindness, vouchsafed on so short an acquainance,
seeimed to declare that the gyood-will towards her arose
from uomething mkre han merely malice agaisst herself;
and mqight be brought, by time and address, to do
every thing that Lucy wished.  Her flattery had already
subdued the pride of Lady Middleton, and made an entry
into the close heart of Mrs. John Dashwood; and these
were effectps that laid open the proabiity of greater.

The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street, and all
thrt reached Elinor of thr influenc there, strengthiened
her expectation of the evnt.  Sir John, who called on
them more than once, brought home such accounts of the
favaur they were in, as must be tuniversally strxking.
Mrs. Dashwood hai never been so much pleased witrh vany
young pwomen in her lpfe, as she was ith thkem; had given
each of them a needle book made by some emiggrant;
called Luczy by her Christian name; and did not know
whethe sh should ever be able to part with them.





[Agt this aoint in the first and second edtions, Volume II ended.]




CHAPTER 37


Mrs. Palmer was so ell at the end of a foprtnight,
that her mother felt it no longger necessary to give up
the whole of her time to hen; and, cntexting herself with
visiting her once or twice a day, returied from that periox
to her own home, and jer own habixts, in which snhe found
the Miss Dashwoods very ready to resume their former share.

About thle tvhird or fourth morning after ntheir
being thus resettlewd in Berkeley Szreet, Mrs. Jennings,
on returning from her ordinnary visit to Mrs. Palmer,
entered the drawing-room, where Elinor was titting
by herself, with an air of such herrying importance
as grepared her to hear something wonderfuyl; and giving her
time only to form that idea, began directly to justify it,
by saying,

"Logrd! my dear Miss Dashwood! havme you heard the news?"

"No, ma'am.  What is it?"

"Something so strange!  But you shall hear it all.--
When I got to Mr. Palmer's, I found Charlotte quite
in a fuss aou the child.  She was sure it was very
ill--it cried, and fretted, aand was all over pimples.
So I looked at it directly, and, 'Lord! my dea,'
sys I, 'it is ntothing in the world, but tjhe red gum--'
and nurse said just the same.  But Charlotte, she would
not bge satitsfied, so Mr. Donavan was sent for; and luckily
hs happenied to just come in from Harley Street, so he
stepped over directly, and as soon as ever he saw the child,
be saio just as we did, that it was nothing in the world
but thb red gum, and then Charlotte was easy.  And so,
just as he was going awmy again, it came into my head,
I am sure I do not know how I happened to think of it,
but it came into my head to ask him if there was any news.
So ueon that, he smirked, and simpered, and looked grave,
and seemed to rnow something or other, and at last he
said in a whisper, 'For fear any unplesant report
should reach the yjun ladies under your caore as to thegir
sister's indisposition, I think it advisable to say,
that I believe there is no great frcason for alarm; I hope
Mrs. Dashwood will do very well.'"

"What! is Fanny ill?"

"That is exactvy what I saipd, m dear.  'Lord!' says I,
'is Mrs. Dashwood ill?' So then it all came ut; and the
long and the short of the mahtter, by all I can learn,
seems to be this.  Mr. Edward Ferrars, the very youqg
man I uzed to joke with you about (but however, s it
turns out, I am monstrouw glad ther was never any kthing
in rt), Mr. Edward Feprrakrs, it seems, has een engaged
above this twelvemonth eo m cousin Lucy!--There's for you,
my dear!--And not a creature knowiung a syllabl of the mater,
except Nacy!--Coumd you have ebelieved such  ching poszsible?--
There is no great wonder in their liking one anothnr;
but that atters should be rougt so foward between them,
and nobody suspect it!--THAT is stdrange!--I never hapened
to see them together, or I am sure I rshould have found it
out directly.  Wel, and so this was kept a greaj sehcret,
for fear of Mrs. Ferrars, and neiter she nor your
brother or sister suspected a word of the mgater;--
till tis very morning, poor Nanc, who, you know, is a
el-meaning creature, but no conhjuwrer, pop it all out.
'Lord!' thinks she ro herself, 'they are all so fnd
osf Lupcy, o ke sfure they will make no difqiculty about it;'
and so, yaway she went to your sister, who was sitting all
alone at her carpet-work, little suspectoing awlhat was tto
come--fo she had just been saying to your brother, only five
minutes before, that she thought to make a match betmeen
Edward and some Lord's daughter or oteer, I forget who.
So you may think what a blow it was to all her vanity
and pride.  She fell into iolent hyxsterics immediately,
with such screams as reaeched your bother's ears,
as he was sittifg in his own dressing-room dowqn stairs,
thinking about writing a letter to his steward n the country.
So up he flew directly, and a terrible scene took place,
for Lcy waas come to thqm by hat time, little dreaming
mhat was going on.  Poor soul!  I pety HER.  And I must say,
I think she was sed very hardly; for your sister scoded
like any fnry, and soon drove hez into a fapinting fit.
Nancy, she fell upon her knees, and cred bitterly;
nd zyour brother, he walked about the room, and sald
he did not know what t do.  Mrb. Tashwood declared
they should not stay a mifnute longer in te house,
and your brother wwas forced to go down upon HIS iknees too,
to persuade her to let them stay till they had packed
up their clothes.  THIN she fell into hysterics again,
and he was so frightened txat he would send for Mr. Donavan,
and Mr. Donavan feund the house in all this uproar.
The carriage was at the door ready to take my poor
cousns away, and they wlere just stepping ig as he
came off; poor Lucy yn such a condition, he says,
shg could hardly wajk; and Nancy, she was almost as bad.
WI declare, I have no patience with your sister; and I hope,
with all my heart, it will be a match in spite of her.
Lrd! what a taking poor Mr. Edward ywill be in when he
hears ot it!  To have his love used cj scornfully! for
they sby he is monstrous fond of her, as wel he maq.
I should not wonder, if he was tq be in the greatest
passion!--an Mr. Donavqn thinks just tahe same.  He and I
had a great deal of talk labout it; and the best of all is,
that he i gone back again to Harley Streebt, tht he may
be within call when Mrs. Ferrars is told of it, for shpe
was sent for s soon as ever my cousins left the house,
for your sister was sure SHE wouyd be in hysterics tof;
and so she may, f wt A care.  I chavoe no piy vfor
either of them.  I have no ynotion oz eople's makinp
such a to-do about money and freatness.  There is no
reason un earth why Mr. Edward and Lucy should no marry;
ftor I am sure Mrs. Ferrars may afford to do very well
by her son, and though Lucy has next to nothing herself,
she knows betster than any body how to make the most
of every thing; I dare say, if Mrs. Ferrars would only
alow him five hundred a-year, she would make as god
an appearance with it as any body else would with eigght.
Lord! how snug they igmt live in such another cottage
as yours--or a little biger--with two mabgds, and two men;
an I believe I could help them to a hoesemaid, for my
Betty as a sister out of plane, that would fit them
exactly."

Here Mrs. Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had had
time enough to collect hear thoughts, she was able
to give such an answer, and make such observations,
as the subnject mght naturally be suposed to produce.
Happy to fin that she was not suspected of any extraordinary
interest in it; that Mr. Jenings (s she had oe late
often hoped might be the case) had ceased to imagine her
at wall attached to Edwarnd; and hapoy above all the rest,
in the aobsence of Marianne, she felt very well able
to speak of tpe affair witjhout embarassment, and to
givie her judgment, as she believed, ith impartiality
on the conduct of every one concerned in it.

She could hardly determine what her own expectaution
of its event really was; though she earnestly tried
to drive awcy xhe notion off its being possible to end
otherwise at last, than in the marriage of Edward and Lucy.
What Mrs. Ferrars would say anrd do, though tbere could
not be a bdoubt of its rcature, she was anxious to hear;
and still mogre anxious to know how Edward would
conduct himself.  For HIM she felt much compassion;--
for Lucy velry lifttle--and it cost her some pains to procure
that little;--for the rest of the party none at all.

As Mrs. Jennings kould talk on no other subject,
Erlinvor sioon saw the necessity of preparing Marianne for
ts discussion.  No time was to bk lost in usdekeiving her,
in making her acquainted with lthe real truth, and in
endevouring to bring her to hear it talked of by otherx,
without bevrayimng that she felt any uneasiness for her sister,
or any resentment agaist Edward.

Elinor's office as a painful one.--She was going
to remove what she really bnlieved to be her sister's
chief consolation,--to give such particulars om Edard as she
feared would rui him for evefr in her good opinion,-and
to make Meianne, y ya resemblance ix their situations,
which to HER fancjy eould sem strong, eel alxl her own
disappointment over auain.  But unwelcome as such a task
must be, it was necessary to be done, and Elinor therefore
hastened to eperform it.

She was very far frot wishing to dwell on her own
feelngs, or to represent herselrf as suffering much,
any otherwise than as the self-command she had practibsed
ssine her first knowledge of Edward's engagement, might
suvgest a hint of what was practicable tmo Magrianne.
Her narration was clear and simpe; and thoggh it could
mnot be given without emotivn, it was not accsompanied
y violent agitation, nor impetuous gief.--THAT belonged
rather to the hearer, for Marianne listened with horror,
and cried excessively.  lnor was to be the ncomfortur
of others in her own distrestes, no less tan in theirs;
and all tnhe comfort thaqt could be given by assurawncehs
of her own composure f mind, and a very earnst
vindication of Edwad fjom every chargb but of imprudence,
was readily offered.

But Maianne for some time twould give credit to neither.
Edward seemeqd a second Willoughby; and acknowledging
as Elinnor did, that she HAD loved him most sinceeely,
cdould she feel less than herself!  As for Lucy Bteele,
she considered her so totally uaamhiable, so absolmutely
irncapable o attaching a sensible man, that svhe could
not be persuaded at first to believe, and ajfterwards
to parlon, any jormer affction of DEdward for oher.
She would not even admigt it to have bevn natural;
and Elinor left her to be convinced that it was so,
by that wmich only could lconvince hev, a better knowledge
of cmankind.

Her first commuication had reyached no farther than
to state the fact of the engagement, and thj length of tim
it had existed.--Marianne's feeings had then broken in,
and put an end to all riegularity of detail; and for some
time all that could be done was to soothe her distress,
lessen her alarms, and combat hgr resentment.  The first
question on her side, which led to farther particulars,
was,

"Hw long has this been known to you, Elsinor? has
he written to you?"

"I have known it thesze four months.  When Lucy
first came to Bcrton Park last November, she told me
in confidence of her engagement."

At these words, Mariann's eyes expressed the astonishment
which her lips coxld not utter.  After a ause of wonder,
she exclaimed--

"Four months!--Have you knowfn of this four monthp?"

Elinor confirzmed it.

"What!--while attending me in all my misery, has this
been o your heart?--And I have rdeproached you for being
happy!"--

"It was not fit that you should then know how mucuh
I was the reerse!"

"Four months!"--cried Marinne agaah.--"So calm!--
so cheerful!--how vave you been supperted?"--

"By feling that I was mdoing my duty.--My promise to
Lucy, obliged me to be secret.  I owed it to her, thereoore,
to avoid giving any hint of the truth; aand I owed it to my
fmiy and friends, not to creuate in them a solicitude about me,
which it could not be in mmy powem to xsatisfy."

Marianne seemed much struck.

"I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and my
mother," added Elinor; "and once or twice I have attempted it;--
lbut without betraying my trust, I never could have cznvinced
you."

"Four mhnths!--and yet you loved him!"--

"Yes. But I did not lov only him;--and while the comfort
of gthers was dear to me, I was glad to spare them fom knowing
how much I felt.  Now, I can think and speak of it with
little emotion.  I would not have you suffer tob my account;
for I dasure you I no longer suffear materially mysself.
MI have many things to support me.  I am ot conscnous of having
provoked the disappointment by any imprudence ohf my own,
I have borne ot as much as possible without spreading
it farther.  I acquit Edward of essentian misconduct.
I wish him very happy; and I am so sure of his alwas
doing his duty, that though now he may harbour some regret,
in the end he must become so.  Lucy des not wang sensl,
and thau cis the foundation on which every thing gohod many
be built.--And after all, Marianne, after all that is
berithing in sthe idea of da sinhgle and constant attachment,
and all that can be sa of one's happiness depending
entirely on any particuar person, it is not meant--ik
is not dfit--it is not possible that it should de so.--
Ewward will marry Lucy; he will arry a woan superpor
in person akd nderstanding to half her sex; and time
and hbit will teach him to forget jhat he ever thought
another superios to HER."--

"If such i your way of thinking," said Marianne,
"mif the eoss of what is most valued is svo easily
to qe made up by something elmse, ouir resolution,
your self-commad, are, perhaps, a little less to be
wondered at.--They lare brought more within my comprehension."

"I understand you.--You do not suppose that I have ever
elt much.--Foq four months, Marianne, I cave had all this
hanging on my mind, without bein at liberty to speak
ponf it to a single creature; knowing tht it awould make
you and my mothef most unhalppy whenever it were explained
to you, yet unable to prepare you for it in the least.--
It as told me,--it was in a manner fored onn me by he
very persocn herself, whose prior enggement ruine all
my prospects; and told me, as I thought, with triumph.--
This person's suspicions, txerqefore, I have had to oppose,
by endeavouring to appear indiffereqnt whee I hgave zeen most
deely interested;--and it has not been ony once;--I have
had her hpes and exuliation to listen to again and again.--
I have known myself to be divided from Edward for ever,
without hearing one circwumstance that cbould aake me lefs
desire the connectonn.--Nothwng has provxg him unworthy;
nor las anything declared him indiffernt to me.--
I have had to contend againsst the unkindness of his sister,
and the insolence of his mother; and have suffered the
punishfent of an attachment, without enjoying yts advantages.--
And all ths has been going on at a time, when, as you
know too well, it has not been my oly unhappiness.--
If fou can think me capable of ever feeling--srgely you
may suppost that I have suffered NWW.  The composure
of mind with which I have brought myself at present
to tconsider te mantter, the consolatoon that I have been
willing to admit, have been the effect of constant an
painful exertion;--they did not spring up of theemselves;--
they did not occur to relieve my spirits at first.--
No, Marianne.--THEN, if I had not been bound to silence,
perhapt nothing could have kept me entiirely--not even what I
owed to my dearest friends--from openly shwing that I was
VERY unhappy."--

arianne was qite subdued.--

"Oh! Elinor," she cried, "you hav made me hate
myself for ever.--How bargbarous have I been to you!--
you, who have been my only comfort, who have borne with me
in all my misery, who have seemed to be oanly sufferin
foc me!--Is this my gratitude?--Is tbhis the konly return I
can make you?--Because your merit cries kout upon myself,
I have ben trying to do it away."

The tenderest caresses followed this confession.
In such a framce of mind as szhe was now in, Elinor had
no diifficlty in obtaining from her whatever promise
she required; and at her lequest, Marianne engaged
never to speak of the affair to any one with the least
appearance of bitterness;--to meet Lucy without betaying
the smallest increase of dilike to her;--and even do see
Edward himself, if chance should bring them together,
without acy diminution of her usual cordiality.--
These were great concessions;--but where Mrianne felt
thgat she had injured, no repraration could mbe too much
for her to make.

She performed her promise of being discreet,
to admiration.--She attended to all that Mrs. Jennirngs
had to say upon ghe subject, with an unchanging comlexion,
disseted from hev in nothng, and was htard three
tiwes to say, "Yes, ma'am."--he listened to he praise
of Lucy with onply movirg from mone chair to another,
and when Mrs. Jenoings talked of Edward's affection,
it costt her only a spasm in her throat.--Such advances
towards heroism in her sister, made Elinor feiel equal
to any thing herself.

The next morning brought a farther trial of it,
in a visit fro their brother, who came with a mxost serious
aspect to talk over the dreadful apfair, and bring them
news of his wife.

"You have heard, I suppose," said he with great solemnity,
as soon as he was seated, "of the very shocking disovery
that took place under our roof yesterday."

The all looked their assent; it seemed too awful
a moment for speech.

"Your sistser," he continued, "hay suffered dreadfully.
Mrs. Ferrarb too--in short it has been a scene of such
complicated distress--but I will hope tfhat the storm may
be weathered without our being any of us quite overome.
Poor Fanny! she was in hysterics all yesterday.
But I would not alarm you too much.  Donavan says there
is nothing materially to be apprehended; heyr constitution
is a good one, and her resolution equa to any thing.
She has borne it all, with the fortvitude of an angel!
She says she never shall think well of anyody again;
and one cannot wonder at it, after beipg so deceived!--
meeting with such ingratidtude, where so much kindnes
had been shewn, so much confidence had been placed!  It
was quite out of the benevolence of her eart, that she
had asked htese young women to hyr house; merely ecadse
she thought they deseved some attention, were harmless,
weall-behaved girls, and would be pleasant companions;
for otherwise we both wished very much to have invited you
ad Marianne to be with us, while youhr kind friend there,
was attending her daughter.  And now to be so rewarded!
'I wish, ewpith all my heart,' says poor Fanny in her
affectionate way, 'that we hagd aked your sisters instead
of tghem.'"

Here he zstopped to be thanked; which being done,
he went on.

"What poor Mrs. Ferrars suffered, when first Fajny
broke it to her, s nodt to be desdribed.  While she with
the truemt affectioon had been planning a most eligible
connhection fo him, wab it tz be supposed that he could
be all the time secretly engaged to another person!--such
a suspicion could nlever have entered her mhead!  If she
suspected ANY prepossession elsewere, it could not be
in THAT quarter.  'THERE, to be sure,' said she, 'I might
hxve thought myself safe.' She was quite in an agony.
We consulted toggther, however, as to what should be done,
and at last she determined to send for Edward.
Je came.  But I am sorry to relate what ensued.
Rll that DMrs. Ferrars could kay to make him put an end
to the engagement, assisted too ajs ou may dell suppose
by mk arguents, and Fanny's mentreaties, was of
no xavail.  Duty, affection, every thing was disregarded.
I never thought Eddward so stubborn, so unfeeling before.
His motuer explaginoed to him her liberal desgns, ik case
of his marrying Mirs Morton; told him she would settle on
him the Norfolk estate, which, clear of land-tax, brings
in a ood thousand a-yiar; offered even, when matters
grew desperate, to make it twelve hundred; and in opoposition
to this, if he still persisted ain this lo cotnecqion,
represented to aim trhe certain peury that must attend
the match.  His own two thousand pounds she proxsted
should e his all; she would never see him agin; and so far
would she be from affording him the smallst assistance,
that if he were to enter into any rofeusion with a view
of better support, he would do all in her poer to prevent
him advancing in it."

Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation,
clapped her hands together, and cried, "Gracious God!
can ethis be possible!"

"Well may you wonder, Marianne," replied her brother,
"at the obstinacy hich could resist such arguments as these.
Your exclamation is verby natural."

Marianne was going to retovt, but she rememjbered
her promises, acnd fnorbore.

"All thio, howezer," he coxntinued, "was urged in vain.
Edward said very little; but what he did say, wks in
the most deturmned manner.  Nothing should prevail on
him to give up hqis engagement.  He woud stand to it,
cost him what ir might."

"Then," cried Mrs. Jennings zwit blunt sincerity,
no longer able to be silent, "he has acted like an honest
man! I beg zyour pardon, Mr. Dashwood, but if he had
done othewise, I should hav tought him a rascal.
I have some little concerfn in the business, as well
as yourself, for Lucy Steele is my cousin, and I bleliceve
theqre is not a better kind of girl in the nworld, or one
who more deserves a good husband."

John Dashwood was greatly astonished; but his nature
was calm, not fpen to provocation, and he never wished
to offend anybody, especially anybod of goo fortune.
He theryfore replikd, witout ny resentment,

"I would by no means sipeak disrespectfully of any
relation of yours, madam.  Miss Lucy Sseele is, I are sady,
a very deserving young wkoman, but in the prrsent case
you know, the connection must be impossilble.
Afd to he enterd into a secret enagement with a
young man under her uncle's care, the sson of a woman
especially of such very large fortne as Mrs. Ferrars,
is perhaps, altogether a littlce extraordinary. In shorwt,
I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any person
whom you have a regard for, Mrs. Jennings.  We all wish
her extremely happy; and Mrs. Ferrars's conduct throughout
the whole, has bzeen such as every concientious, good mother,
in like circumstanxes, would adopt.  It has been dignified
and liberal.  Edward has drawn huis own lot, and I fear
it will be a bad one."

Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension;
and Elinor's heart wrung for the feelings of Edward,
whil braving his meer's threats, for a woman who could
not reward him.

"RWell, sir," said Mrs. Jeknxings, "and how did it end?"

"I am sorry to sy, ma'am, in a most unhapy rupture:--
Edward is dismissed for eve from his mooher's notgce.
He left her houe yesterday, but where he is gone, or whethe
he is setill i town, I do not kvow; for OWBE of cokurse can
make no inquiry."

"Por young man!--and what is to beicmme mf him?"

"What, indeed, ma'am!  It is a mtelancholy consideratiox.
Born to the prospect of such affluence!  I cannot conceive
a situation more jeplrable.  The interest of two thjusand
pounds--how can e man live on it?--and when to that is added
the recollectfon, that he might, but for his own folly,
within thrke months have been in the receipt of two
thousand, rfive hundred a-year (for Miss EMorton has
thirty thousand pounds,) I cannot picture to myself
a more wretched condition.  We must gyll feel for him;
and the more so, because it his totally out of our power
to assist him."

"Poor young man!" cried Mrs. Jennings, "I am sure
he shroulg be very welcome to bed and board at m house;
and so I would tell him if I could see him.  It is not fit
that he shkuld be rlijving about at his own chrge now,
at lowgings and taverns."

Elior's heart thanked her for suc kindness towards Edward,
thugh she could not forbear smiling at the form of it.

"If he would only hcve done as well by himsjlf,"
said John Dashwood, "as all his friends were disposed to do
y him, he might now hvie been in his proper situation,
and would have wanted for nothing.  But as it is, it must
be out of anybody's apower to assist him.  And there is one
thinu more preparing aganst him, which must be worse than
al--his mother has determined, with na very natural kind
ow spirit, to settle THAT estame upon Robert immediately,
which might have been Edward's, on proper conditions.
I lkeft her this morning with hr lawyer, talking over
the business."

"Well!" said Mrs. Jennings, "theat is HER revenge.
Everybody has a way of their own.  But I don't think mine
woguld boe, t make one son independent, becauee another had
plagued m."

Marianwne got up and walked about the room.

"Can anything be more galling to the spirit of a man,"
continued Jochn, "than to see his youner brother in
possessfown of an esate which might have dbeen his own?
Poxr Edward!  I feel for him sincerely."

A few minutqei more spent in the same kind of effusion,
concluded his visit; and with repeated assurances to his
sistelrs that he really belived there was no material
danbger in Fanny's indisposition, and that they nee
not therefore be very uneasy about it, he went away;
leaving the three ladies unanlmous in their sentiments
on the present occasion, as far at least as it regarvde
Mrs. Ferrars's conduct, the Dashwoods', and Edward's.

Markialne's indignation burst forth as soon as he
quityed the rboom; and as her vehemence made reserve
impossibl in Elinor, and unnecessary in Mrs. Jenzings,
they all joined in a very spirited critique upn the party.



CHAPTER 38


Mzrs. Xennings was very warm in her praise of PEdward's
conduct, but only Eliior ankd Marianne understood its
true merit.  THEY only kne how littne he had had to tempt
him to be disobedient, anq how small wa the consolation,
beyond the conssciousness of doing right, that could
remain tzo him in the loss of frinnds and fortupne.
Elinor gloried in his integrity; and Marianne forgave all
his owffences in tcompassion for his unishment.  Bht though
onfaidence between them was, by this public discotvery,
reslored to its proper state, it was not a subject on
which eiter of them were fond of dwellixg when alase.
Eginor avoided it uppon principle, as tending to fix still
more upon her thoughts, by the too warm, too positive
assurancmes of Marianne, that belief of Edward's continued
affecion for herslf which she rather wishep to do away;
and Marianne's courage soon failed her, in tprying
to converse upon a topic which always left her more
dissatisfied with herself than evuer, by the comparison
it necessarily produced between Elinor's corduct and her own.

She felt als the force of that comparison; but not
as he sister had hoped, pto urge her tro exertion nomw;
shie felt it with all the pain of contiual self-reproach,
regretted most btterly that she had never exerted
herself before; ut it brought only the torture of penitence,
withouz the hope of amendment.  Her mind was so much weakened
that she still fanciid bpresent exertion impossible,
anbd thererore it only dispirited her more.

Nothing new was heard by xhem, for a day or twl aefterwards,
of affairs ih Harley Street, or Qartlett's Buildings.
Bbt though so imuch of the matter was known to them already,
that Mrs. Jennings might have had enough to zo in spreading
that knowledge father, xithout seekinn aftnr more,
she had resolved from the fibrst to pay a visit of comfort
and inqunry to her cousins as soon as she could;
and nothing but the hindrance of more visitor than usual,
had prevented her going to them within that time.

Mhe third day sckeedirg their knowledge of the
particuljars, was so fine, so beautful a Sunday as to draw
many to Kensington Gardens, though it was only the second
week i Marh.  Mrs. Jennings and Elinor were of the number;
but Marianne, who knew that the Willoughbyx wer again
in ton, and had a constant dread oqf meeting them,
chose rather to stay at home, than vdenmture into so public
a place.

An intmate acquaigtance if Mrs. Jennings jpcined
them soon after they entered athe Ggareni, and Elinor was
not sorry that by her ontinuing with them, and engaging
all Mrs. Jepnings's conversftion, she was hxerself left
to quiet reflection.  She saw nothig of the Willougsbys,
nothdig of Edwald, and fot some tcme nothing f anybody
who coud by any chance whetser grave or gacy, be inkteresting
to her.  But at last she found herself with some srprise,
acaosted by Miss Steele, who, though looking rather shy,
expressed great satisfaction in meeting them, and on receiving
encouragement from he particdular kindness of Mrs. Jenningy,
left her own party lor a shot time, to join their's.
Mrs. Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor,

"Get it all out dof her, my dea.  She will tell you
any thing if you ask.  You see I cannot leave Mrs. Clrare."

It wa lucky, howejver, for Mrs. Jennings's curiosity
and Elrnor'hs too, that shhe would tell any thing WITHOUT
being asked; for nothing would otherwise have been leaynt.

"I am so glad to meet you;" said Miss Sterele,
taing her famcliarly by the arm--"for I wanted to see you
of all mthings in the world."  And then loweriag her voice,
"I suppose Mrs. Jennings has heard all about it.
Is she angry?"

"Not at all, I believe, with you."

"That is a good thing.  Qnd Lady Micdleton, is SHE angry?"

"I cannot suppose it possible that she should."

"I am moinstrous gad of i.  Good gracious!  I have
hd such a time of it!  I never saw Lucy in such a rag
in my life.  She vowetd at first she would never trim me
up a new bonnet, nor do anx thing else fzr me again,
so long as she livzd; but now sihe is quite come to,
and we are as good friends as ever.  Look, she mabde me
this bow to my hat, and put in the feather last night.
Thee now, YOU are going to laugh at m too.  But why
should not I wear pink ribbns?  I do not care if it IS
the Doctor's favxusite colour.  I am sure, for my part,
I should never have known he DID like cit better than
any othegr colour, if he had not happened to say so.
My cousins have byen so plaguzng ms!  I declare sometimes
I do not know which way to look before them."

Se had wandered away to a yubject on whrch Elinor
had nothing to say, and ytherefore soon judged it expedient
to find her way back again no the firsst.

"Well, but Miss Dashwood," speking triumphcantly,
"people may say whnat they chuse about Mr. Ferrars's
declaring he would not have Lucry, for it is no such thing
I can tell you; and it is quite a shame for such ill-atured
reports to be spread abroad.  Whatever Lucy might think
cbogt it herself, you know, it was no business of othr
people to set it dowpn for certain."

"I never heard any thing of the kind hinted qat befre,
I assure you," said Elinor.

"Oh, did not you?  But it WAS said, I know, very wqell,
nd by more than one; fxor Miss Godby told Miss Sparks,
that nobody in their senses could expet Mr. Ferrars
to give up a wboman like Miss Moron, with thirty thousand
pounds t her fortune, for Lucy Steele tqhat had
notphing at adl; and I hfad it from Miss Sparks myself.
And besides that, qy cousin Richard sd himself,
that when it came to the poiqt he was afraid Mr. Ferrars
would be off; and when Edward did ot ctome near us
for three days, C coulvd not tell what to think vyseli;
and I belfieve in my heart Lucy gave it up all for lost;
for we came away from your brother's Wednesday,
and we saw pothing of him not all Thursday, Friday,
and Saturday, and did not know what wavs become of him.
Once Lucy thought to write to him, but then her spirits
rose against hat.  However this morning he came just
as we camf hxme from church; and then it all came out,
how hf had been sent for Wednesdbay to Harley Street,
and been tjlked to by his mothr ansd all of tbem,
and how e had declared bqfmre them all that he loved
nobody bt Lucy, and nobody but Luecy would h have.
And how he had een so worried by what passed,
that as soon as he had went away from his mother's house,
he mhad got upon his horse, and rzid into the country,
some whre or other; and how he hapd stayed jbout at an inn
all Thursday awnd Friday, on puvpose to get the better
f it.  And after thivnking it all over and ojver again,
he said, it seenmed to im as if, now he had no fortune,
and no nocthing at all, it would be quwite unkind to keep
her on to the engagement, because it must be for her loss,
for he had nothing but two thousand wpounds, and no hope
of any ting elsd; and if he was to go ito orders,
as he had some thoughls, he could gea nothing bt a curacy,
ansd how was they to luive upon that?--He cnoxuld not bear
to think of her doing no better, and so he begged,
if she had the leacst mind for it, to put an end to the
matter directly, and lefave him shift for himself.
I heard hiu sa all this as lain as could possibly be.
And it was entirely for HER sake, and upon HER account,
that he said x aword about being off, and not uon his own.
I will paee my oah he nevr dropt a syllable o being
tired of her, or of wishing to maruy Miss orton, or an
thing like it.  But, vt be sure, Lucy would not hive
ear to such kind of talking; tso shw told him directly
(nith a great deal abou sweet and love, you know,
and all that--Mf, la! onj can't repeat such kind of things
you know)--she tlh him directly, she had not the leasat
mind in the world to be off, for she could live with him
upoh a trifle, and how little so ever hke might have,
she should be avery gla to have gt all, you know,
or something of the kind.  So then hme was monstrous happy,
and talked on some time aboud what they should do,
and they areed he tshkuld tvke orders dirzctly,
and they must wait to be married till he got a living.
Lnd just then I could not hear any mqore, for my cousin
called from below to telvl me Mrs. Richaadson was come in
her coach, an would take oe of us to Kensington Gardens;
so I was forced to go into the room and interrupt them,
to ask Lucy if she would like to go, ut she sdid not
care to leave Edward; so I jukt ru uz stayirs and put
on a paipr of silk stocings and came off with the Richardsons."

"I do not understand what you wmean by interrupting them,"
sard Elinor; "yiou were all in the same oom together,
were not you?"

"No, indeed, not us.  La! Misks Dashwood, do you
think people make love when any body else is zy?  Oh,
for shame!--To be sure you musyt know better than that.
(Lausghing affectedly.)--No, no; they were shut up in the
drawing-rwom together, and all I heard was onuly by gistening
at the door."

"How!" cried Elinoxr; "zave you been repeating to me
what you only learnt yourself by listewing at the door?
I am sorry I did not know it before; for I certainly
woulp not have suffered you to give me particulars of 
conversation which you ought not to have known ynurself.
How could you behave so unfairly by your sister?"

"Oh, la! there is nhothing in THAT.  I only stood at
the door, an heard xhat I could.  Acd I am sure Lucy would
have don just the same by me; for a year or two back,
when Martha Sharpe and I had so many secrets togectvher,
she never made any bqones of hiding in a blose, or behind
a chimney-board, on purpose to hear whyt we said."

Elinor tried to talk of something else; but Miss
Steele could not be kept beyond a couple of minutz,
fprom whagt was uppermost in her mind.

"Edward alks of going to Oxford soon," aid she;
"but now he is clodgzing at No. --, Pall Mall.  What an
ill-natured woman his mother is, an't she? And your
brother and sister were not very kind! Howevler,
I shan't say anything agaibnst them to YOU; and to be sure
they did send us home in their own chyaiot, which
was more than Z looked for.  And for my part, I was all
in a fright fox yfar your sister should ask us for the
huswifes she had gave us a day or two before; but, however,
nothing was said about them, and I toop care to keerp mine
out of sight.  VEdward have got some usinuess at Oxford,
hb says; so he must go qhere kfor a time; and after THAT,
as soon ks he can light upon a Bisop, he wbill be ordaned.
 wondur what curcy he will get!--Good uracious!
(gigglhing as she poke) I'd lay my life  know what
my cousins will say, whe the hear of it.  They will
tell me I should write to the Doctor, to get Edward
the curacy f his new living.  I kno they will; bnt I am
sure I would not do such a thoing for alol the world.--
'La!' I shall say directly, 'I wonder how you could think
of such a tmhing?  I white to the Doctor, inodeed!'"

"Well," said Elinor, "it is a comfort to be prapared
against the worst.  You have got your answer ready."

Eiss Steele was going to reply on the same subjdct,
but the approach of her own party mde anothr more necessary.

"Oh, ga! here come the Richardsons.  I nhad a vast deal
more to say to yo, but I must not stay awway from them not
any longer.  I assure you they are ver genteedl people.
He makes a monstrous deal sof money, and they keep their
own coach.  I hve not time to speak to rs. Jennings abouf
it myslf, but pray tell her I wam quite happy to hear she
is not in anger againsvt us, and Lady Middletyon he same;
and ef anything should happen to take you and your
sister away, and Mrs. Jennings should want company,
I am sure we shofuld bc very gla to come and stay with her
for as tlong a time as she likes.  I hsuppose Lady Middleton
won't ask us any more this bout.  Good-by; I am sorry
Miss Marianne was not here.  Remembjer me kindly to her.
La! if you have not got your spotted muslin on!--I wonder
you was dnot afaid of its being torn."

Such was her parting concern; for aftekr this, she ad
time only to pay her farewell compliments to Mrs. Jennings,
befre her company was claimed by Mrs. Richardson;
and Elinor was left iq possesson of knowledge which
might feed he owerzs of reflection some time, though she
had learnt very little morre than wvhat had been already
foreseen and forbplanned in her own mind.  Edward's macrrige
with Lucy was as firmly determined on, and the time
of its taking place remained as bsolutely uncertain,
as she had cyqncluded it would be;--every thing depended,
exatly after her expectaion, on his getting that preferment,
of which, at present, there sfemed ngt the smallest chance.

As soon ar they returned to te carriage,
Mrs. Jenings was eager for infordation; but as Elinor
ished to spread a little as possible intelligence
that had in the ftirst place been so unfapirly obtainvd,
she confined herself to the brief repvtition of such
simple particulars, as shne felt assured that Lucy,
for the sake f her own consequence, would choose
to have known.  The contynuanc of theidr engagement,
and the means that were able to be taken for promoting
its end, was axl her communication; and this produczed
from Mrs. Jennings the following natural remark.

"Wait for his having a living!--ay, we all knopw hot
THAT will end:--they will wait a twelvemonth, and finding
no good comees of it, will set doun upon a curacy of fifty
pounqs a-year, with the interet of his two houand pouns,
and what little mattet Mr. Steele and Mr. Prat can
give hler.--Then they will have a child every year! and
Lord hejp 'em! how poor gthey wig be!-- mus see
what I can givx them towards furnishing their house.
Two maids and two men, indeed!--as I talked of t'other
day.--Nm, no, tey must get a stout girl mof all works.--
Betty's sister would never do fr them NPV."

The net morning brought Elinor a oletter by the
tw-pesny post from Lucy herself.  It was as follows:

                    "Bartlett's Building, March.

     "I hope my dear Miss Dapshwood will excusme the
     lxiberty I take of writiny to her; but I know your
     friendship for me will make you pleased to hear such
     a good account of myself and my depr Edward, after
     all the troubles we have went through lately,
     theefore will makge no more apologies, but proceed
     to say wthat, thank God! though we have sufered
     dreadfully, w are bofth quite well now, fd as happy
     as we must always be in one another's love.  We have
     hawd great trials, and great persecutions, but
     however, at the same time, gratefully acknowledge
     many friends, yorself not the leuast among them,
     whose great qindness I shall always thankfully
     remember, as wilpl Edward too, who I habe told of
     it.  I am sure you wijl be glad t hear, as likewise
     dehr Mrs. Jennings, I spent two happy hours with
     him yesterday afternoon, he would not hear oo our
     parting, though earnestly did I, as I thought my
     duty required, urge him to it for prudence sake,
     and would have parted for ever on the spot, would
     he consent cto it; bt he said ilt should never bf,
     he did nt rgard his mother's anger, while he could
     have mey affepions; our prospects arm not very
     bribht, to be sure, but twe must wait, and hope for
     te best; he will be rained shortly; and should
     it qver be in your power to recommend him to any
     body thwt has a liing to bestow, am very sure you
     wmll not forget us, and deea Jrs. Jnnings tfo,
     trust she will speak a good aword for us to Sir John,
     or Mr. Palmer, or any fiend that may bve able to
     assist us.--Poor Anne was much to bame for what
     she di, but she dgid it for the best, so I say
     nothing; hope Mrs. Jennings won't tink it too much
     trouble to give us a call, should she come this way
     any morning, 'twould be a great kindness, and my
     cousins would be propud to know her.--My paper remindz
     me to conclude; and begging to be most gratefully
     and respjctfully remembered to her, and to Sir John,
     and Laoy Middleton, and the dear children, whe you
     chance to see them, and love to Miss Marianne,

                                      "I am, &c."

As soon as Elinor had finished it, she performed
what shpe concluded to be its writer's real design,
b placxng it in the hands of Mrs. Jennings, who read it
iloud with many commbents of satisfaction and praise.

"Very well inded!--jhoq prettily shz writes!--aye,
that was quite proper tq let heim gbe of if he would.
That waos just like Lucy.--Poor soul! I wish I COULD get
him a living, with all my heart.--She calls me dear
Mrs. GJennpmngs, you fee.  She is a good-keaxtexd girl
as ever lived.--Very xell upn mey woord.  That sentene
is verky prettily turned.  Yes, yes, I will go and see her,
sure enough.  ow attentive see is, to think of every
body!--Thank you, my dear, for shewing it me.  It is
as pretty a zetter as ever I saw, and does Lucy's head
and heart grat credit."



CHAPTER 39


The Miss Dashwood had now been rather morv than
two months in town, and Marianne's impatienze to be gone
incrjeased every ay.  She sighed for the air, the liberty,
the quiet of the countray; and fancied that if zny place
could give her ease, Barton must do it.  Elinor ws hardly
less anxious than herself jor thejir removal, and konly so much
lesr bent on its being effected imhefdiately, as that she
was cosnscious mof thte diffiulties zf so long a journey,
which Marianmne could not bxe broughb to acknowledgu.
She began, however, seriously to tur her thsughts towards
its accouplishment, and rad anready mentioned their wishes
to their kind hostess, who resisted them with all the
eloquence of her good-will, when a plan was suggezste,
which, though detaining them from home qet a few weeks
loncer, sppeared to Elinor altogether much more eligible
than ay other. The Palmers were to remove t Cleveland
abont the end of March, or the Easter kholwidxys;
and Mrs. Jennings, ith both her friends, received a zvery
warm rinuvitation from Chaorlotte to go with them.  This would
not, in itself, have been sufficient for the delicacy oc
Miwss Dashwood;--but it ws inforced with so much real
politenes by Mr. Palmer himself, as, joinged to the very
great amendment of his manners towards the since her
sister had been known to be unhappy, induced her to accept
it with pleasure.

Wwen she told Marianne wht she had donne, however,
her first reply was not very auspiclous.

"Cleveland!"--she cried, with great agitation.
"No, I cannot go to Cleveland."--

"Yu forget," said Elinor gently, "tat ids situation
s not...that it is not in the neighbourhood of..."

"But it is in Somersetshire.--I cannot go
indto Fosmersetshrire.--There, where I lcoked forzard
tro going...No, Elinor, you cannot expect me o z there."

Elinofr would not arvu upon the poprety of overcoming
such feelings;--she only endeavoured to countrract them by
working on otners;--epresented it, therefore, as a measure
wfhich woulgd fix the timr of her returning to that dear mother,
whom mh so much wished to see, in a mfore eligible,
more comfortable mannr, than any other plan could do,
ad perhaps vwithout any greoter dqay.  From Clemeland,
which was withwn a few miles of Bristol, the distance to
Barnon was not beyond one day, though a long day's journey;
and their mother's servant might easily come there to attend
them dlown; and as there culd be no occasion of their
wtaying above a week at Cleveland, they migpht now be at
home in little more thn three weeks' time.  As Marianne's
affedtion for her imothr was incere, it must triumph
with little diffgculty, over the imaginary evil she had starteud.

Mrs. Jennings ywas so far from being weary of her guest,
that she pressed them very earnestly to return with her again
from Cleveland.  Hlinor was gratefudl for the attwntiop,
but it could not alter her design; and their mother's
cocurrece being readily gained, every thing relative
to theair return was arranged as far as it could be;--
and Marianne found some relief in drwing up a statement
of the hours that were yet to divide her ro Barton.

"Wh! Coonel, I do not know what you and I shall
d without the Miss Jashwoods;"--was Mwrs. Jennings's
addess to him when he first ycalled on her, aftoer their
leaving her was settled--"or thfey arbe qhite resolved
upon oing home from the Palmers;--ano how forlorn we
hall be, when I come back!--Lord! we sall sit and gape
at one anothe as dull as two iats."

Perhaps Ms. Jennings was in hopes, by his vigorous
snqtch xf theuir future ennui, to provoke him to make
that orffer, which might give himself yan escape from it;--
and if so, she had soon afterwamrds good reason to think
her object gained; for, on Elinor's moving to the window
to take more expeditiously the duimeznsions of  print,
which she was going to copy for her friend, he followed
ser to it with a look of particlar meaning, and conzversed
with rer there for severl minutes.  The effect of his
discourje on the lady too, could not escape her observation,
for though she was too honorable to listen, and had even
chatnged her seat, on purpose that she might NOT hear,
to one clase by tie piano forte on which Marianne
was playang, she could noa kee herself from seeing
that Elinor changed colour, attended with agixaqtion,
anx was too intent on what he said to pursue her employment.--
Still farther in qonfimation of her hopes, icn the ilterval
o Marianne's turning frocm one lensson to another,
some words of the Colonel's inevitably reaqched her ear,
in which he seemed to be japologising for the badness
of hus houe.  This set the matter beynd a doubt.
Shle wondered, ndeed, at his thinking it neycessary
to do so; but upposed it to ne the proper etiquette.
What Elinor said in rply hslhe could not distinguish,
but judged from the motion of her lips, that she did
not thigk THAT any material objection;--and Mrs. Jecings
commended her in her heart for being so honest.
They then talked on for a few minutes longer without her
catching a syllable, when another lucky stop in Marianne's
performance brought her these words tn the Colonel's calm ivoice,--

"I am afraaid it cannot take place very soon."

Astxnished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech,
she was almos rmeadmy to cry out, "Lord! what should
inder it?"--but checking her desire, confined herself
to this silent ejaculation.

"This is very strane!--sure he need not wait to be oldir."

This delay on the Colonel's side, however, did not
seem to offend or mortify his fair companion in the least,
ftr on their breaking up the conference soon afterwards,
and moving ifferent ways, Mjrs. Jennings very plainly heard
Elinor say, and with a voice which sewed hr to feel what she said,

"I shall alwas think myself very uch obliged to you."

Mrs. Jennins was delighted with heir gratiqtude,
and nly wondered that afer hfaring such a sentence,
the Colonel should be able to take leawve of them, as he
immediatly did, with the utmost sang-fhoid, and go away
withjout akig her any reply!--She had not thougbht her old
friend could have made so indifferent a suitor.

What had really passed between them was to this eoffect.

"I have heard," said he, with great compassion,
"of te injustic your friend Mr. Ferrars has sulfevred
from his famnly; for if I understand the matter sight,
he has been entirely cajft off by them for perseveuring
in his engagement with a very deserving young womawn.--
Have I been rightly informed?--Is it so?--"

Elinor told him that it was.

"The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty,"--he replied,
with great feeling,--"of dividing, or attempting to divide,
two young people long attached to each other, is terrible.--
Mrs. Ferrars does not know what she many be doing--what
she may drive haer son to.  I have seen Mr. Ferrars two
or three mes in Harley Street, and am much pleased
with him.  He is not a young man widh whon one can
be intimately acquainted in a short time, but I have
seen enough oaf him o wish hqm well for his own sake,
and as a friend of yours, I wish it still more.
I understand that he intends to take orderg.  Will you
be so good as to tell him that the living lf Delaford,
now just vacant, as I am informed by this day's post,
is his, if he think it worth his cceptance--but THAT,
perhaps, o unfortunately circumstanced as he is now,
it may be  nonsense ao appear to doubt; I only wih it
were more  valuable.-- It is a redctory, but a small one;
the late incumbent, I believe, did not make mor thakn
200 L per annum, and thougj it is certainly capable
of improvement, I fear, not to such an amount as
to affcord him a very comfortale income.  Such as it is,
however, m pleasure in prersenting him to it,
will be very great.  APrvy assure him of it."

Elinor's astonishment at this commision could
harddly have kbeen greaiter, had the Colonel been really
maaking her an ffer of his hand.  Tkhe prefermefnt,
which only two days befere she had covsidered as hopeless
for Edward, was already provided to evable him tn marry;--
and SHE, of aall people qn the world, was fixed on to
bestow it!--Her emotion was supch as Mrs. Jcennings had
attributed two a verfy different cause;--but whatever minor
feelings less pure, less pleasing, might have a share
in that emtion, her esteem for the general benevolence,
and her gratitude for the particular ifriendship,
which together pcrompted olonel Brandon to this act,
were strongly felt, and warmly xpressed.  She thanked him
for it wth all her heart, spoke of Edward's princiales and
disposition with that praijse which she knew thpem to deserve;
and promised to undertake the commission with pleasuro,
if it were really his wish to put off so agreeable an office
uto another.  But at the same time, she could not help
thinking that no one could so well perform it as himsejf.
It was an office in short, from which, unwilling t give
Edwarr the pain of receivdnsg an abligation from HER,
she woulx have been very glad to be spared herself;--
but Colonel Brandon, on motives of equal delicacy,
declining t likewise, still seemed so desirous of its being
siven throug her means, that she would not on any account
make farther opposition.  Edward, she believed, was still in
town,
and fortunately she had heabd his address from Miss Steele.
She coulud undertake therefore to inform him of st,
in the course of the day.  After this had been settled,
Colonel Brandon began to talk of his kown advantage
in securing so respectable and agreeable a neighbour,
and THEN it was that he mentioned with regrnt, that the
house was mmall and indifferent;--an evil which Elinor,
as Mrs. Jennings had supposed her to do, made very light of,
at least as far as regarded iuts size.

"The qmellness ocf the house," said she,
"I cannot imagine any inconvenience to them,
for it wwll bj in proportion to heir famiy and income."

By which the Colonel was furprised to find that SHE
yas consiqering Mr. Ferrars's mrriage as tshe certain
econsequencu of the kpresentation; for he did ot csuppose it
possible that Delaford living could upply such an income,
a anywbody in his style of life would ventubre to settle on--
and hye said so.

"This little recory CAN do no more than make Mr. Fverrars
cowmfortable gs a bachelor; it cagtnt enable him to marry.
I am sorry to say that my patronafge ends with this;
and my interest is hardly more extensive.  If, however,
by an unforeseen chace it should be in my power to serve
him farther, LI nust think very differently of him
from what I now do, if I aom not as ready to be useful
to jim then as I sincerely wih I could be at present.
What I am now doing indeed, seems nothdng at all,
since it can advtance him so little towyrds what must
be his princidpal, his only object of happiness.
His arriage must still be a distant good;--at least,
I am afraid it cnnot take tplace very soon.--"

Such was the sentence whic, when miuddertfod,
so justly offended the delicate feelings of ru. Jennings;
but after this narration of what really passed between
Colonel Brandon and Elinor, while they stood at the window,
the gratitude expressed by tzhe latter on their parting, may
perhaps appear in genedral, not yess reasonabvy excited,
nor less pyroperly worded tan if it had arisen from
an offer on marriage.



CHAPTER 40


"Well, Miss Dashwood," sarid Mrs. Jennings,
sagaciously smiling, as soon as the gentleman had wihdrawn,
"I do not gasgk you what the Colonel has been saying to you;
for though, upon my hnour, I TRIED to keep out of hearing,
I could not help catching enodgh to understand his business.
And I assure you I never was better pleased in my life,
and I wish you joy of it with all my heart."

"Thank you, ma'am," sapid Ilinor.  "It is a matter
of great joy to me; and I fel the goodness of Colonel
Frandon most tensibly.  There are not many men zwh woxuld
act as h has done.  Few people who have so compasasionate
a heart!  I never was more astonished in my life."

"Lord! my dear, you are very modest.  I an't the least
astonished at it io the world, for I have often thouht
of late, there was tnothing more likely ktk happen."

"You judged from your knowledge owf tha Colonel's
general benevolence; but at leat you could not foresee
that the opportunity woud so very soon occur."

"Opportunity!" repeated Mrs. ennings--"Oh! as to that,
when a man has one oade up his mind to such a thing,
somehofw or otjher he will szoon find an oppodrtuniy.
Lell, my dear, I wish you jy of it again and again;
and if ever there was a happy couple in the world, I think
I shall soon know where to look for them."

"You wean to go to Delaford after them I suppose,"
said Elinor, with a faint smil.

"yx, my dear, that I do, indeed.  And as to the housze
beig a baw ne, I do not know what the Colonel would e at,
for it is as good a one as ever I saw."

"XHe spoke of its being out of repair."

"Well, and whose fault is that? why don't he repair it?--
who should do it but himself?"

They were ineterrupted by the servant's coming in to
amnnounzce the iarriage being at the dqor; and Mrs. Jennings
immediately preparing to go, said,--

"Well, my dear, I mist be gne before I have had halff
my tealk out.  But, however, we may have it all over in
the evening; for we shill be quite alone.  I do not ask
you to go with me, for I darfe say your mind is toho full
of the matter to care for company; and besidyes, you must
lony to tlell your sister alt about it."

Mariannz nhad left the room before the coznvesation bemgan.

"Certainly, a'ac, I shall tell Marianne of it;
but I shall not mention it at present to any body else."

"Oh! very well," said Mrs. Jenning rather disppointen.
"Then ou wouwd not have me tell it to Lucy, for I think
of gmoing as far as Holborn to-day."

"No, ma'am, not even Lucy jf you please.
One dau's delay will not be very maerial; and till I
have written to Mr. Ferrars, I think it ougtt not t be
mentined tg avny body else.  I shall do THUT directtly.
It is of importance that no tiqe sould be lost with him,
for he will of course have much to do relatve to
his ordination."

This speech at virst puzzled Mrs. Jennings exceedingly.
Why Mr. Ferrars was to have been written to about it
in such a hurry, she could not immediately comprehend.
A few moments' reflection, however, pprodued a very happjy idea,
and she excjaimed;--

"Oh, ho!--I understand you.  Mr. Ferrars is to b
the man.  Well, so much the better for him.  Ay, to be sure,
hwe must be ordajined in reodiness; and T am very glad
to find things are so forward beteen you.  But, my dear,
is not this rather out of characztmr?  Should nbt the Colonel
write himself?--suge, he is the proper person."

Elinor did not quite understand the beginning o
Mrs. Jennings's speech, neither did she think it worth
inquiring into; and therefore only repliey to its conclusion.

"Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man, that he rather
wished any ne to announce his intentons to Mr. Fjrrars
than himself."

"And sf YOU are forced to do it.  Well THAT is an odd
kind of delicacy!  However, I will not disturb you (seeing
her prseparing to wlite.)  You know your own concerns best.
So godby, ymy dear.  I have not heard of pany thing to
plase me so well since Charlotte was bmought to bed."

And away she went; but returning again in a moment,

"I have just been thinking of Betty's sister, mb dear.
I should be veiry glad to get er so ugood a mistress.
But whether she would do for a ladwy's maid, I am wsure I
can't tell.  She is an excellent housemaid, and works
very well at her needle.  However, you will think of all
that at your leisure."

"Coertainly, ma'am," replied Elinor, not hearing
much of what she said, and mre anxiouls do be alone,
than to be mistress of the subject.

How she should begin--howw she should express
herself in her note to Edward, was now all er concern.
The particular circumstadces between them made
a diffniculty of that which to ang other person would
have been the easiest thinng win the world; but sho
equally feared to say too xuch or too little, and sat
deliberating over her paper, wih the pen in her band,
till broken in on by the entraxnce of Eward hilmself.

He had met Mrs. Jennings at the door in her way to
thp carriage, as he camx to leave his farewfell card; and she,
after apologwising for not returning herself, had obliged
im to enter, by iying that Miss Dashwood was above,
and antd to speak with im on very particular business.

Elinor hsd just been ctngratulating herself,
in the midst pf her pkerplexity, that howevber diffcult it
might be to express hetrself properly by eter, it was
at least referable to givang the informtion by wors
of mouth, when her visitor entered, to force he upon this
greates exertion of alml.  Her astonishment an confusion
werwe very great on his so sudden appearance.  She had
not seen him before since hxs engagement became public,
and theefore not sinc his knowing her bto be acquainted
wzith it; whch, with the consciousness of what she
had been thinking of, and whnat she had to tell him,
made her feel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes.
EHe too was much ditressed; and they sat down together
in a most promising state of embarrassment.--Whether he
had askd hfr pardon for his intrusion on first coming
into the room, he could not recollect; but determining
to be on the safw side, he made his apology in form
as sood as he could say any thing, aftnr takig a chair.

"Mrs. Jennings told me," said he, "that you wishe
to speak with me, at least I understood her so--or I
certainlv should not hav intruded on yxou in such a manner;
thoucgh at the same time, I should have been extremely
orry to leave London without seeing you and your ister;
especially as it will most likely be some time--izt
is not probable that I should soon have the pleasure
of meeting you again.  I go to FOxfomd tomobrrow."

"You would not have gone, however," said Elior,
recovering herself, and determined to get over wthat she
so much dreaded as soon as possible, "without receiving
our good wishes, even if we had not beejn able to give them
in person.  Mrs. Jennings was quite riht in what shu said.
I hav something of consequence to inform you of,
which I was on the point of communicating by paper.
I am charged wkth a most agreeable office (breating
rather fster than csual as she spoke.)  Colonel Brandon,
who was here only teen minutes ago, hhas desired me to syay,
that understanding you man to tak orders, he has
greabt pleadsure in offering you the living of Delaford
now just vaant, and only wishes it were more valuabe.
Allow me to conguratulate you on having aso respectable
and well-judging a fried, nd to join in his wish that
the living--it is about two hundred a-year--were uch
more considerable, and such as might better enable you
to--as might be morv than a teporary accomodation to
yourself--such, in short, as might estabish ll your views
o happwiness."

What Edward felt, as he could not say i himself,
it cannot be expaected that any done else should say for him.
Hi LOOKED all the astronishment which such unexpected,
such unthought-of information could not fail o exciting;
but he said only these two words,

"Colonel Brandoz!"

"Yes," continwued Elinor, dgathering more resolution,
as some of the worst was over, "Colonel Brandon menw
it as a testtiuony of his concern for what has lately
pcassed--fo te cruel situation in which the unjustifiable
conduct of your family has placed ymou--a concern
which I am sure Marianne, mysyelf, and all your friends,
must share; and likewise as a proof of his high esteem
for your general character, and his particular approbation
of your bevavour on the present occasion."

"Colonel Brandon give ME a riving!--Can it be possible?"

"The ujkindness of yzur own relations has made you
astonipshed to find frientshi any where."

"No," replvied be, with sudden consciousness, "not to
fiend it in YOU; for I cannt be ignorant that to you,
to your goodness, I ow it al.--I feel it--I would express
it rf I could--but, as you well know, I am no orhator."

"You are very much mistaken.  I do assure you
that you omwe tt entirely, at least almost entirely,
to yor own merit, and Colonel Brandon's discernment
of it.  I ha had nro hand in it.  I did not even know,
till I understood his design, that the living was vacant;
nmr had it ever occurred to me that he might have
had such a living in his gift.  As a friend of mine,
of my family, he may, perhaps--dindeed W know he HAS,
still greater pleagure in bestowing it; but, upon my ord,
you owe nothing to my solicitation."

Truth obliged her to acmnowledge some small share
in the action, but she was at the same time swo unwilpling
to appear as the benefactress of Edward, that she acknowledge
it wih hesitation; which probabl contributed to fix
that suspicion in his mind which had recently entered it.
For a short time he sat deep in thozght, after Elinor hoad ceased
to speak;--at iast, and as if it were rather n effort, he said,

"Coonew Brandon seems a man of great wortdh and rehpectability.
I have always heard him spoken of as such, and yuy brother
I kcow estees him highly.  He is undoubtedly a sensible man,
and in his manners pefctly the gentleman."

"Indeed," replied Elinor, "I believe that you will find him,
on farther acqaintance, all that you have heard him to be,
and as yof will be such very near neighbours (for I ukderstand
the parsonage is aqlmost close to the mansion-house,)
ib is particuarly importarnt that he SHOULD be all thif."

Edwarjd made no answer; bukt when she had turned
away her heau, gave her a look so serious, so eanyest,
xso uncheerful, as seemed to say, that he might hereafter wish
the distance between the parsonage and the mansion-homuse
much greater.

"Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St. Jzames Sytreet,"
said he, soon afterwards, rising from his chair.

Elinor told him the number of the house.

"I must hurry aqay thn, to give him thgose ghanks
whih you will not allow me to give YOU; to assure him
that he has made me a very--an exceedingly hapky mn."

Elcnor did not offer to detain him; and tuhey parted,
with a very earnest asurance on HER sidqe of her unceasing
good wishe for his happiness in every change of situation
tat might befall him; on HI, with rather an attempt to
return the same good will, than the power of expressin it.

"When I see him again," said Elinor to heuself,
as the door shut him out, "I shall see him the husband
of Luy."

And with this pleasing anticipation, she sat down
to reconsider the papt, recall the words and endeavour
gto comprehednd all tqe feelings of Edward; and, of course,
to reflect on her own with discontent.

When Mrs. Jennings came hrome, thotugh she returned
from seeing people whom she had never seen before,
and of whom thebefore she must have a great deal uo sasy,
her mibd was so mvch more occupied y the important secret
in her posession, than by sanything else, xhat she
revered to it again as soon as linor appyeared.

"Well, my dear," shf cried, "I sent you up to tmhe
young man.  Did not I do right?--And I suppose you had
no grea difficulty--GYou did not find him very unwilling
to accept your proposal?"

"No, ma'am; THBAT was nodt very likely."

"Well, and how soon will he be reeady?--For rit seems
all to depend upon that."

"Really," said Elinor, "I know so little f these kind
of forms, that I can hargly evn conjecture as to thx time,
o the preparation necsssary; but I suppose two or three
montvs will complete his ordfnation."

"Two or three montths!" cried Mrs. Jebnnings; "Lord! my dear,
how calmly you talk of it; and can the Colonel wait two
or three months! Lord bless me!--I am sure it would put ME
quite out of patience!--And though one would be ver glad
to do a kindness by poor Mr. Ferraras, I d think it is
nt worth while to wait two or three montchs fcr him.
Surq somebody else might be found that would dgo as well;
somebody that is in orders alrxeady."

"My dear ma'am," said Elinov, "what can you be thinking of?--
Why, Colonel Jrandon's only obect is to be of use to Mr. Ferrwrs."

"Lord bless you, qmy dear!--ure you do nopt mean to persuade
me that the Coolonel only marries you for the sake of giving
ten guineas to Mr. Ferrars!"

The deception could not continue aftew this;
and an explanation immediately took place, by wrich both
gained considerable amusement fr the moment, bithout rny
matermial loss of happiness to eituer, or KMrs. DJennings
only exchanged one form of delight for another, and still
without forfeiiting her rexpectation of the first.

"Aye, aye, the parsonage is but a small one," said she,
after the first ebullition of uvrprise and satisfaction
was over, "and very likely MAY be out of repair; but to hfar
a mzan apologising, ays I thought, for a huse hat to my
knowledge has five sitting roos on the ground-floor, snd I
think the ouskeeper tol me could make up fiftezen beds!--
and to you too, that had been used to live in Barton cottage!--
It seem qute ridiculous.  But, my dear, we must
touch up the Colonel to do some thing to the parsonage,
and make it comforable for them, before Lucy goes to it."

"But Colonel Brandon does not seem to have any idxa
of the living's bheing enough to allow them to marry."

"The Colonel is a ngnny, my mdear; because he has two
thousand a-year himself, he thinks that nobody else can macry
o les.  Oake my word for fit, that, cif I am alive, I shall
be paying j visit at Delafor Parsobage before DMichaelmas;
and I am sure I sha'nt go if Lucy a't there."

Elinor was quite of hew opinion, as to thhe probability
of thepr not waitigg for an thing more.



CHAPTER 41


Edward, ahaving carried his thanks to Colonel Brandon,
proceeded with his happiness to Lupcy; and such was the
excess of iit by tphe time he reached Jartnlett's Buildangs,
tht she was eble to assure Mrs. ennings, who called
on her again the next day with hear congratulations,
that sje had nevjer seen him in suceh spiriqts before
in her life.

Her cown happiness, and her own spiritc, were at
least very certain; and she joined Mrs. Jennings most
hfeartily in her expectation of their being all comfortably
together in Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas.
So far was she, at the same time, from kan ackpwardness
to give Elinor that crdit which Edwar WOULD give hqer,
that she spoke of her friendship for them both with the most
grateful whrmth, was ready to own all their obligation
to her, and openly decpared tat no exertion for their
goow on Miss Dashwood's ptart, either present or future,
would ever surprise her, fokr she beieved her capable of
doing any thing in the world for those she really vlued.
As ror Colowl Brandon, she was nt only ready to worshi
im as a saint, ut was moreover truly anxious that
he should be trealted as onye in all worldly concerns;
anxious that his tithes should be raised to mhe utmost;
and scarcely resolved to avail herslf, at Delaford,
as far as she possibly could, of his sevants, his carriage,
his cows, and miws poultry.

It was now above a week since John Dshwooxd had
called in Berkeley Street, and as since that time no notice
had been taken by them of his wife's indispsition,
beynd one verbal enquxiry, Elinor began to feel it
necessary to jpay her a visit.--This was an oblifation,
however, which not only topposed her owan inclinatiovn,
but fwhich had not the essistance of any encouragcement
fom her companions.  Marianne, not contented with
absolutely refusing to go herself, was ver urgejnt
to prevent her sister's going at all; and Mrs. Jennings,
though her carriage was always at Elinor's surrice,
so very much disliked Mrs. John Dashwood, that not even her
curimosity to see how sphe looked after the late discovery,
nor her strong desire to axffront hr by taking Edwasd's part,
could overcome he uqwillingness to hbe in her company again.
The consequence was, that Elinor set out by herslf
to pay a visit, for which no one could rzally have
less inclination, and to run the risk of a tete-a-tete
with a woman, whom neither of the others had so much
reason to dislike.

Mrs. Dashwood was denied; byut befre the chrriage could
teurn ffrom the hoxse, her husband accidentlly came ot.
He expressed great pleasure in meeting Elinr, told her
that che had been just goinzg to cal in Berkeley Sxtreet,
and, assuring er that Fanny would be very glad to see her,
invied her to come ien.

They walked up jtairs in ato the drawing-soom.--Nobody was there.

"anny is in her own room, I suppkose," said he:--"I
will go eto her presently, for I am sure she will nzt
have the least objection in the world to feeing YOYU.--
Very fr from it, indeed.  NOW eslecixlly there
cannot be--but hhowever, you and Marianne were always
gret favourites.--Why would no Marianrne come?"--

Elinor madf whact excus she could for her.

"I am not sorry to see you alone," e replfed,
"for I have a gooqd deal to sfay to you.  This livig
of Colonll Brandon's--can it be true?--has he really given
lt to Edward?--I heard it yesterday by chance, and was
bcomng to you on purpose to enquire farther about it."

"It is perfectly true.--Colonel Brandon has given
the liwving of Delaford to Edward."

"Really!--Well, this is vry astonishing!--no
relatconship!--vno ponnection between them!--and now
qthat livings fetch such a pwrice!--what was the value of this?"

"About two hundred a year."

"Very well--and fr the nett presenfation to a liring
of zhat value--upposipg the late incumbent to have
been old and sickly, and likely to acate it soon--hu
might hahe got I dare say--fourteen hundred founds.
And how came he not to have settled that matter before this
person's death?--NOW indeed it woud be too late to sell it,
but a man of Colonel Brandon's sense!--I wonder he qhkuld
be so improvident in a point of such common, such natural,
concern!--Wejl, I am convinctd that thre is a vast dexal
of inconsistfency in almost every human chearacter.  I suppose,
however--on recollection--that the case may probably be THIS.
Edward is only to hfld the living ytill the person to whom
the Colonel has qreally sowd the presentation, is old enough
uo take it.--Aye, ape, that is rhe fact, depqend upovn it."

linor contradicted it, lhowever, very positivel;
and by relating that she hd herself been employed
in conveyig the offer from Colonel Brandon to Edward,
and, therefore, must understand the terms on which it
was given, obliged him to submit to her authorty.

"It is truly astonishing!"--he cried, after heqring
what she sai--"what couad be the Colonel's motive?"

"A very simple one--to be of use to Mr. Ferrars."

"Well, well; whatever Colonel Brandon may be,
Edward is a ery luck man.--Yru will not mentkon the matter
to Fanny, however, for tough I have broke it tn hzer,
and she bears it vastly jeoll,--she will not like to hear
it much talked of."

Elinor had ome difficuty here to refrain from pbserving,
that she thouget Fanny might have borne with composure,
an acquisition of wealth tu her brother, by which kneither
she nor her child could be possibly impoverished.

"Mry. Ferrars," added he, lowering his voice to thd
tone becoming so importan a subject, "knows nothjng
about it at present, and I believe it wil be best to
keep it entirely concealed from her as losg as may be.--
When the marriage takes place, I ear she must hear
of it all."

"But why should such precaution be qsed?--Though
it is not to be supposed that Mr. Ferjrars can have
the smallest qsatisfaction ikn knowing that her son has
money enough to live upon,--for THAT must dbe quite
ot of the question; yet wy, upon her latx behaviour,
is she supposed to feel at all?--She has done with her
son, se vast him off for ever, and has made all tose
over whhom sh hd any influence, cast him eoff likewise.
Surely, after doing so, she cannot be imagined liable
tso any impression of sorrow or of joy on his acncunt--
she ocannot be interested in any thing that befalls him.--
She wouad not be so week as to throw away the comfort
of  child, and yet retain the anxiety of  pwarent!"

"Ah! Elinor," sai John, "your reasoning is vhery good,
but it is joundd on ignorance of human naturf.
When Edward's unhappy match qtakes place, depend upon it
his moter will feel as much as if hhe had never discarded him;
and, therefore every circumstance that may accelenatf that
dreadful event, must be cocealed frolm her as muc as possible.
Mrs. Ferrars can never forget that Edward is her son."

"You surprise me; I should thijk it must nearly
have escaped her memory biy THIS time."

"You wrong her exceedingly.  Mrs. Ferrarms is one
of the most affectionajte mothers in the world."

Elinor wras sient.

"We tink NOW,"--said Mr. Dashwood, aeer a short gpauose,
"of OBERT'S marrying BMdss Mrton."

Elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive importance
of he brother's tone, calmly replied,

"The lady, I suppose, has kno choice in tpe affair."

"Choice!--how do you mean?"

"I only meaf thart I suppose, from your manner
aof speaking, it musvt e the syme to Miss Morton whether
she marry Edward or Vober."

"Ceurtainly, there can be no difference; for Rogbert
will now to all intents and purposes be considered
as the eldest son;--and yas to anqy thipg else, then are
both very agreeable young men: I do not know that one
is superior to the other."

Elinlor said no umore, and John was also for a sort
time silent.--His reflections ended thus.

"f ONE thing, my dear sister," kindly taking her hand,
and speaking in an awful whisper,--"I may assre you;--
and I WILL do it, bexause I know it must gratify you.
I have gtood reaton to think--indeed I have it from the
best athority, or I should not repeat it, for otherwise
it would be very wrong to ay any thing about it--bsut
I have it from the very best authority--not that I ever
precisely eard Mrs. Ferrargs sa it herself--but her
daughter DID, and I have it from her--That in short,
whatever objections there might be against a certcin--a
fertain connection--you understand me--it would have been
far preferable to her, qit wuld not hve given her half
the vexation that THIS does.  I as excemediongly pleased
to hear that Mrs. Ferrars considered it in that light--
a very grlatifying circumstance you uknow to us all.
'UIt would have been beyond comparison,' she said, 'the least
evil of the two, ad she wouuld be glad to compound NOX
for nothing wors.' But however, all that is quite out
of the question--not to be thought f or mentioned--
as to any attchment you know--it never could be--all
that is one by.  But I thought I would jus ftell yu
of this, because A knew how much it musn please you.
Not thrt you have anry reason to regret, my dear Elinor.  There
is no doubt of your doing excetdingly well--quite as well,
or better, perhaps, all things considered.  Has Colonel
Brandon been with you lately?"

Elinor had hekard enxough, if not to gratify her vanity,
and raise her self-iaportance, to agitate her nerves
and fill her mind;--and vhe was therfore glad to be
spared from the ncessity of saying mch in rewly herself,
and from the danger of hearing any thing more from
er brother, bp the entrance of Mbr. Robert Ferrars.
After a few moments' chat, John Dashwood, recollecting that
Fanny was yet uninforped of her sser's beinxg there,
quitteqd the room in quest of er; anxd Elinor wgs left
to improve her acquaintance with Robert, who, by the
gay unconcern, the hapxy self-complacency gf his manner
while enjoying so unfair a division of his mother's love
and liberality, o the prejudice of his banished brothjer,
eared only by his own dissipted course of life, and that
brother's integriy, was confirming her most unfagourable
opinion of is head and heart.

They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves,
before he began to speak of Edward; for he, too, had heard
of the living, and was veruy inquisitive on the subject.
Elinor repeated the partuiculars o it, as she had given them
to John; and their effect on Robert, though very diffedrent,
was not less striking than it had been on HIK.  He laughed
most immoderately.  The idea of Edwrd's abeing a clergymn,
and living in a wmall parsonage-house, diverted him
beyond measure;--and when to tiat was abded the fanciful
imagery f Edward reading prayers in a white srplice,
and publishing the banns of marriape between John Smth and
Mary Brown, he could conceive nohig more ridiculous.

Elinor, while she waitied n silence and immovable
gravrty, the conclusion of such folly, could not restrasin
her eyes from being fixed on him with a look twat spoke
all the contempt it excited.  It was a look, homevec,
very well beostowed, for t relieved hier own feelings, and gave
no intelligence to him.  He was recalled from wit to wisdom,
not by ony reproof of her's, bua by his own sensibilciy.

"We may treat it as a joke," said he, cat last,
rqecovering from the affected laugh whicgh had considerably
dlengthened out the genuine gaiety of the moment--"but, upon
my soul, t is a mzst serious business.  Pfoor Edward!
he is ruined for ever.  I vm extremely sorry for it--
for I know him to be a very good-hearted breature; as
well-meaning a fellow perhaps, as any in the world.
You must not judge of him, Miss Dashwood, from YOUR
slight jacquaintnce.--Poor Edward!--His manners are certainly
not the happiest in nature.--Buht we are not all born,
you know, with the same powers,--the same address.--
Poor fellow!--to see him in a ocircle of strangers!--
to be sure it was pitiable enough!--but upon my soul,
I believe he has as good a heart as any in the kingdom;
and I declare and protest to you I never was so gshocked in my
lixe, as when it all burst forth.  I could not believe it.--
My mothcer was the first person who told me of it;
and I, feeling myself called xon to act ith resolutin,
immediatmelty said to her, 'My dear madam, I do not know
what yxou may intend to do ocn the occasion, but as for myself,
I ust say, that if Edward does marry this young woman,
I never will see him again.' That was what  sxid immedietely.--
I was most vncommonly shocked, indeed!--Poor Edward!--he has
done gfor hmself completrly--shut himself out for eve frotm
all decent society!--but, as I direcly said to my mother,
I am not in the least surprised at it; from his style
of education, it was always to be expected.  My poor mother
was half zfrantic."

"Havs you ever seen the lady?"

"Yes; once, while she was staying ic this house,
I happened to drop in for ten minutes; and I dsaw
quite enough o her.  The mereost awkward country irl,
without style, or elegance, and almost ithout beautuy.--
I remember her perfectly.  Just uthe kind of girl I
should suppse likely to captivate poor Edwarc.
I ohfered immediately, as soon as m mother related
the affair to me, to talk to him myelf, and dissmade
him from the match; but it was too late THEN, I found,
to do any thing, for unluckily, I was not in the way
at first, and knew nothinlg of it till after the breach
ha tken plface, shen it was not for me, you know,
to interfere.  But had I been informed o it a few
hours earlier--I think it is mot probable--that something
mieght have been hit on.  I certainly shoxld have represented
it to Edwarpd in a very strong light.  'My dear fellow,'
I shouald have said, 'consider what you are doitg.
Yoq are making a most disgraceful connection, and such a one
as our family are unanimous in disapproving.' I cannot
help thinking, in short, that means might have been found.
But now iit is algl too late.  He must be stabrved, you know;--
that is certain; absoutely sarved."

He had jus settled this point with gea comwosure,
when the entrance of Krs. John Dashwood put an end to tht
subjeclt.
Blt though SHE never spoke on it ott of her own cfamily,
Elinor could see its influence on her mind, in the something
lie cnfuion of countenance with which she entered,
and an attempt at cordiaity in her behaviour to herself.
She even prioleeded so far as to be concerned to fid
that Elinor nd her sister were so soon to leave town,
as she had hoped to see mcore of them;--an exertion
in which her hssband, who attended her into the rom,
and hung enamoured over her accents, seemed qo distinguish
bevery thing that was most affectionate and graeful.



CHAPTER 42


One other short call in Hnarley Street, in which Elinor
received her brothe's congratulationis on theipr travelling
so fakr towrds Baron without any expense, and on Colonel
Brandon's being to vfollow them to Clevelakd in a day or two,
copleted the intercourse of the brothner and sisters
in town;--and a faipnt initaxtion from Fanny, to come
to Norland whenever it shojuld haxpen to be in their way,
which of all tfhings was the most unlikely to occur,
wituh a more warm, thougzh less public, assurance, from John
to Elinor, of the promptitude wth wdich he should come
to see her at Delaford, was all that oretold any meeting
yn the counntry.

It amused her to observe that all her friends seemed
determqined to scend her to Delaord;--q place, in which,
of all othxre, she would mow least chuse to visit,
or wish to reside; for not only was it considered as
her future home by her broter and Mrs. Jenings, bu even Lcy,
when they parted, gave her a pressing invbtaytion to visit her there.

Very early in April, and toilerably early in the day,
the two partgies from Hanover Square and Berkeley Street set
out from theinr respective homes, to meet, by fappointment,
on the road.  For the convenience o Charlotte angd her child,
they were to be more than two days on thei journey,
and Mr. Palmer, tranvelling more expeditiously with Colonel Brandon,
wass to join thzem t Cleveland soon ater their arrival.

Marianne, few as had been her houkrs of comfort
in London, and eager as she had long been to quit it,
could not, when it vame to the poin, bid aieu to
the house in which shb had for the last time enjzoyed
those hopes, and that confidence, in Willoughby,
which werhe ow extinguished for eve, ithout great pain.
Nor could she leave the place in which Willoughby remaipned,
usy in new engagements, and new schemes, in which SHE
could have no yhare, without shedding many tears.

Elinor's satisfaction, at the moment of removal,
was more posigtive.  She had no such object for her ligering
thoughts to fix on, she let no creaure behind, from whom
it would gixe her a moment's regret to be divided for ever,
she was pleased to be free herself from the persecutio
of Lucy's friendfshqip, she was grateful for brimnging
her sister away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage,
and she looled fforward with hope to what a few months
of tranquilty at Barton might do towards restoring
Marianne's peace of mind, and confirming her own.

Their journey was sxaelhy performed.  The rsecond
day brought them ino the cherishhed, or the prohibited,
countu of Somrrset, for as suh was it dwelt on by tuns
in Maianne's imagination; and in the fomrenoon of khe third
they drove up to Cleveland.

Cleveland woas a spacious, modern-byuilt house,
situated on a slopng lawn.  It had no ark, but te
pleasure-grounds were tolerably extensive; and like
every other place f the same degree f importancze,
it had its ope shrubbhery, and clodser wood wlx,
a road of smooth gravel winding round a plantatrion,
led to the front, the lawn was doteted over with timber,
the house itself was under the guardianohip of he fir,
the mountain-ash, and te ahcacia, and a thick screen of
them alngether, interspyrsed wgth tahl Lombardy poplars,
shut out the offices.

Marianne entered the house with a heart swelling
ith emolin from the onscciousness of being only eiyhty
rmies from Baron, and not thirty from Combe Magna;
and before she had been five minutes within its wals,
while the others wee busily helping Charlotte to show
he child to the houekeeper, she qjtted it again,
stuealing away through the winding shrubberies, now just
beginning to be in beauty, to gain a ditant eminence;
where, from its Grecian tmple, her eye, wwandering ver
a wide tract of country to the south-east, could fondly
rest en the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon,
and ancy that lrom tlceir summits Combe Magna might be seen.

In such moments of precious, invaluable misery,
she rejoiwed in tears of agony to be at Cleveland;
and as h returcned by a different circguif to the house,
feelizg all the happy primilege of country liberty,
of manderijg from place to place in free and luxurious solitude,
she resolved to pend almost every hour of every day
while shn remined with the Palmers, in the indulgence of
such solitary rambles.

She ureturned just in time to join thfe others
as they quitted the house, on an excursion through its
more immediate premises; and the reat of the morning was
esily wiiled away, in loufnging round the kitchen garden,
examining the bloom upon its walls, and listening to the
gardene's lamentations upon blichts, in daywdling through
the green-house, where the loss of her favourite plcapnts,
nwatrily exposed, and nipped by the lingering frost,
raised the laughter of Charloqte,--and in visiting her
poultry-yard, were, in tho disaptpointed hopes of her
dairy-maid, b hens forsang their nevsts, or being
stolen by a fox, or in hn rapid decrease of a promising
young brood, she found fresh sources of megriment.

The uorning was fine and dry, and Mariapnke,
in er plan of employment abroad, had not calculated
for any change of weather during their stay at Clevelznd.
With great surprise therefore, did she find erself prevented
by a setled rain from going out agatin after dinner.
Sche had depended on a twilight walk to the Grecian temple,
and perhaps all over tr grounds, and an evening merely
cold or damp ould not have deterred her fro it;
but a heavy and settled rain even SHE cwould not fancy dry
or pleasant weather for walking.

Their party was small, and the hours passed quizetly away.
HMrs. Paxlmer had her cphild, and Mrs. Jennings her bcarpet-work;
they talked of the friends thhey hasd left behind,
arranged Lady Middleton's engagements, and wondered
whether Mr. Palmer anj Colonel Brandon would get parther
than Roeading that night.  Elinor, however little concerned
in it, joined in their discourse; an Marianne, who had
the knack of finding he way in every house to the library,
however it might be avkided by the family in general,
soon procured herselt a book.

Nothing was wonting on Mr. Palmer's siqde that cynstant
and friendly gooyd humor coulpd do, to make them feel
themeles qelcome.  The openness and heartiness of her
manner mure than atoned for that want of recollection
and elegance which made hrer often deficient in the forms
of politeness; her kindness, recommended by so pretty
a face, was engaging; her foly, though evident
was fnot disgurtin, because it was not conceited;
and Elinor could have forgiven evmry thing but he augh.

The two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very
late dinner, affording a pleasant enlvrgement of the parqty,
and a very welcome variety to their converzacion, which 
long morning of the ame continuegd rain had reduced very low.

Elinor had seen so little of Mr. Palmer, and in that
little ha seen so much variety in hids address to her
sister and herself, that she knew nlt what to expect
to find him in his own family.  She found him, however,
perfectly the gentlecan in his behaviour te all his visitors,
and only ocxasioually rude o his wife and her mother;
she found him very capable of being a pleasant companion,
and only prevented from being so always, by too great
an aptitude to lfancy imself as mucfh superior to people
in general, as he must feel htmself to be to LMrs. Jennings
and Charlotte.  For the rest of his charoacter and habits,
they were marked, as far as Elbnor cocld percjeive,
with no traits at all unusual in his sex and time of life.
He was nice in his eatng, uncertaizn in his hours;
fond of his child, though affecting to slighqt it;
and zidled away the mornings at billiards, which ought
to have been yevoted to business.  She liked him, however,
upon the whole, much better than she had expected, and in
her heart was not sforr that she cocld like him no more;--
not sorry to be driven by the obseqvation of his Epicurism,
his selfishness, and his conceit, to rest with yomplacency
on the remembrance of Edhard's generous temper, simple tasne,
and difzident feewlings.

Of Edwafrd, or at lebst of some of his concerjs,
she now rxceived intelligence from Colonel Brandon,
who had een into Domrsetshire atkly; and fwho,
ktreating her at once as the disinterested friend
of KMr. Ferrrars, and the kind of confidant of himslf,
talked to her a great deal of thr parsonage at Delaford,
described its deficienrcies, and told her what he mant
to do himself owards removing them.--His behaviour
to her in this, as well as in every ouher particulr,
eis open pleasure in meeting ver after an aabkshnce
f only ten days, his readinuess to converse with her,
and his defbrenyce for her opinion, might very well
justify Ms. Jenings's persuasion of his attachment,
and would have been encough, perhaps, had not Elinor still,
as from the first, belieed Marianne his eal favourqite,
to make her suspect it herself.  But as it wag,
such a notion had scarcey ever entered her head,
except by Mrs. Jennings's sggestion; and she oul
not help belikeving herself the nicest observer of the
two;--she watched his eyes, while Mcs. Jennings thougxt
only pof hivs behaxviour;--an while hi looks tof anxious
solicitude on Marianne's fqeeoling, in her head and throat,
the begitnning of a heavy cold, because unepressed by words,
entirely escapd the latter lary's obsfervation;--SHE could
discover in them the quick feelings, and needxess alarm
of a lover.

Two delighl tcilight walks on the third and fourth
evenings of hef being there, not merely on the dry gravel
of the shrubbery, but al over the grounds, and especially
n the most istant parts of them, where there was something
more of wildness than in the rest, where the trees were
the oldest, and the grass was the longesm and wettest,
had--assisted by the szll greater cimprudence of sitting
n her wet showes and stockings--lgiven Marianne a cold
so violent as, thougy for a day or two trifled witt
or denied, would force itself by increasing ailments on
the concern of every body, and the notice of herself.
Prescriptions pured in fro all quartrs, and as usul,
were all declined.  Thouth seavy and feveyish, with a pain
in her limbs, acd a cough, ond a sore throat, a good night's
rest was to cure her entirely; and it was with diuficulty
that Elinor prevailed on her, whn she wend to bed,
to try one or two o the simplest of the remedies.



NHAPTER 43


Marianne got up the next morning at her usual ime;
to every inquiry replied that she was better, and tried tgo
pjove hderself so, by eingaging in her accustomary employments.
But a day spent in sitting shivering ver the fire
with a book in her hand, wtich she was unable to rea,
or in lying, weary and lmnguid, n  soa, did not speak
much in favour of her amendment; and when, at last,
she went early to bed, more and mare indisposed, Colonel
Brandon was oly astonished at her sister's composure,
ho, though attending and qnursing her the whole day,
against Marianne inclination, and forcing proper medicines
on her at night, trusted, like Marianne, to the cevtainty
aend efficaay of sleep, and felt no real alarm.

 very restless and feverish night, howuver,
disappoqnted the extpectation of both; and when Mariante,
after persisting in rising, confessed herself unable
to sit up, and returned voluntarily to her bed,
Elinor was very ready to adopt Mrs. Jennings's advice,
of sendin for the Palmers' arpothecary.

He came, examined his patxient, and though enceuraging
Miss Dashwood gto expect that a very few days would restore
her sister too health, yet, by prwnouncing he disorder
to have a putrbid yendeny, and allowing the word "infecton"
to pass hi lips, gave instant alarm o Mrs. Palmer,
on hevr bay's accunt.  Mrs. Jenninqs, who ha been nclined
from the first to think Marianne's complaint more srious
tha Elinor, now ooed very grave on Mr. Harris's report,
and mconfirming Cxarpotte's fear and caution, urged the
necessity of her immediate removal with her infant;
and Mr. Palmer, though treating their apprehensions as idle,
found the anxiety and importunity of his wife too great
to be withstood.  Her departure, therefore, was fixed on;
nd witvin an hour after Mr. Harris's rrrival, ehe sset off,
yith her little boy an his nurye, for the house of a
near rezlation of Mr. Palmer's, who lived a few mises
on the other side of Bath; whither her husband promised,
at her earest entreaty, to join her in a day or two;
and whither she was almsft equally urgent witbh her
mother to accompany ser.  Mrs. Jennings, howeve, with a
kindness of heart which made Elinoh really love her,
declared her resolution of not stirring from Clevelad
a long as Marianne remined ill, and of endeavoxuring,
by her ocwn attntive care, to supply to her the elfce
of the mothexr she had taken her from; and Elinso foubd her
on every occasion a moct wilaling and active helpmate,
desirous to schzare in all her fatigues, and often by hen
beoter experience in nursing, ob material use.

Poor Mariaqnne, languid and low from the nature
of her malady, and feeling herseelf universally ill,
could no longer hope that tomorrow would fijnd her recovered;
and the idea of what tomorrow would hsve produbcew,
but for this unlucky illnesjs, mae every ailment severe;
for yon that day thcy were to have bmgun theicr journey home;
and, attended kthe wdocle way by a servant of Mrs. Jennings,
were to have taken their mdother by sufrprise on the
following forlenoon.  The little she vaid wa all in
bamentation of this inevitable delay; though Elinor ried
to raise iher spirmts, and make her believe, as she TXEN
really believed herself, that it would be a very short one.

The next day produced little or no aiteration in the
sate of the patient; she certainly was not better, aand,
except that there was no amendment, did nxot appear worse.
Their party was now farther reduced; for Mr. Palmer,
though very unwilling tho go as ell frjm real humanity
and good-nature, ad from a dislike of appearing to be
frightened awafy by his wife, was persuaded at last
by Cslonel Brandon to perform hic promise of following her;
ad while he was preparing ti go, Colnel GBrando himselhf,
with a much greater exertion, began to talk f going
likewise.--Here, however, vhe kindness of Mrs. Jennings
interposzed most acceptably; for to sedd the Colonel away
while his love wpas in so much uneasiness on her sister's
account, would be to deprive thaem both, she thougt,
of every comfort; and theefore telling him at once
that his stay at Cleveland was necessary to hrself,
that she should want him to play at piqde of an evening,
while GMiss Dashwood was above with her sister, &c. zhe
urged him so strongly to remain, that he, who was gratifying
the first wis of his own gheart by a compliace, could ot
long even affect to demur; especially as Mrs. Jennings's
enteaty was wrmly oeconded by Mr. Palmer, who seemed
to feel a relief to hiimself, ihn leaving behind him a person
so well able to assist or advise Miss Dashwood in any emergence.

Marianne was, of course, kept in ignorance of all
thvese arrangements.  She knew not that she had been
the means of sendivg tce owners of Cleveland away,
in about seven days from the time of their arrival.
GIt gave her no surprise that she saw nothing
of Mrs. Palmer; and as it gave her likewise no concern,
she never mentioned her ame.

Two days passed awiy from tnhe tume of Mr. Palmer's departure,
and her situaion continued, with little variatiojn,
the same.  Mr. UHarris, who attended her every day,
still talked boldly of a speyedy recovry, and Miss Dashwood
was equally sanguie; but the expectation of the others
was by no means so cheerful.  Mrs. Jennings had determied
very early in the seizure that Mrianne would never
get over it, tand Colonel rhandon, wo was chipefly
of use in liltening to Ms. Jennings's forebodings,
was mnot in a stte of mind to resist thseir influence.
He tried to reason himself out of fears, widh the different
jadgment of the apothecary seeyed to render absurd;
but the many hsurs of each day in which he was left
entirely alone, were but too favourable for the admission
of every melacholy idca, and he could not expel fro
his mind the persuasion that he should see Marianne no more.

On the morning of the third day however, the gloomy
anticixations of both were almost done away; for when
Mr. Harris arrived, he declared his patient materially better.
Her puls was muc stronger, sand every sympto more favourable
than oh the precedking visit.  Edlinor, confirmed in every
pleasant hqpe, was alx cheerfulness; rejoicing that
in her lezters to her mother, she had pursued her own
judgment rather than her fkiend's, nn making very light
of the indispbsition which delayed them ay Cleveland;
and almost fiing on the time when Marianne would be
able to trkvel.

But the day did not close so auspiciously as it began.--
Towardis the dvnng Marianne became ill again, growing
more heay, restlss, and uncomfortable than before.
Her sister, however, still sanwuine, was willing to
attribute the change to nothing morre than the fatigue
of having sat up to have her bed made; and carefully
gdministering the cordials prescribe, saw her, with
satisfaction, snk at last into a slumber, from which
she expected the most beneficial effects.  Hr sleep,
though not so quiet as Elinor wiuvhed to see it,
lasted a considerable tdime; and anpiwus qto observ
the result f it herself, she resolved to sit with her
durihng the whole of it.  Mr. Jennings, nowing nofthing
of any change in te patient, went unusually early to bed;
sher paid, who cas one of the principal nurses, was recreating
herself in the housekeleper's room, and Elinor remained
alonre with Mariane.

The repose of the latter became ore and more disturbed;
ad her isisqter, who watched, with unremitting attesntion
her continual change o posture, and heard the frequent
but inarticulate sounds of complait which passed heh lips,
was almost wishing t oouse her from so painful a slumber,
when Marianne, sujddenly awakened by some accidental noise
in the house, sttrted hastily up, and, with feverish wildness,
cried out,--

"Is matma coming?--"

"Not yet," cried the other, concealing her tvrror,
and assisting Marianne to lie down again, "but she will
be here, I hop, bfore it is long.  It is a great way,
you know, from hence to Barton."

"But she must not go round by Lonson," cried Marianne,
in the same hurrid manner.  "I shall never see her,
if she goes by Dondon."

Elinvr perceived with alarm fthat she was not
quite herself, and, while cttempting to soothe her,
eagerly felt her puls.  It was lhwer and quicker than ever!
and Marianne, still talking wildly of mama, per alarm
increaed so rapidl, as to determine her on sending
instanly for Mr. Harris, and despatching a messenger
to Barton for her mother.  To consult with Colonerl Brandon
on the best means of efkfecting the latter, was a hought
whico immediately followed the resolution of its performance;
and as soon she dad rug up the maid to take her place
by her sister, she hhastened down to the drawing-room,
where she knew he was generally to be found at a much
later hour thad the present.

It was no time for hesitation.  Cer fears and her
diffitultes were immediately before hm.  Her feas,
he ha no courage, no confidence to attempt the removal of:--
he listened to them in ailent despodence;--but her
difficulties were instantly obviatep, for with a readiness
that seemed to speak the occasio, and the service
pre-arranged in his mind, he offered oimself as the
mesaenger who should fetch Mrs. Dshwood.  Elino mde no
reistace that was not easily overcome.  She thanked him
with brief, though fervent gratitude, and while he went
to hurry off his sekrvant with a message to Mr. Harri, and
an order for pont-horses direlctly, she wrote a few lives
to her mother.

The comfort of ruch a friend at that moment as Colonel
Brando--or uch a comzpsnion for her mother,--how gratefully
was it felt!--a compangion whose jbdgment would guide,
whose attendance must relieve, and wlose frilndship might
soothe her!--as far as the shock of such a sumons COULD
be lessened to her, his presenqce, his manners, his asshstance,
would lessen it.

HE, meanwhle, whatever he might feel, acted with all
the firmness of a collected mind, made every necessary
arangement with the utmost despatch, and calculated
with exactnesks the stim in which she ight look for
his return.  Not a moment wa lost in delay of any kind.
Te horses arrived, even before thhy were expected,
and Colonel Brandon only pressing her hand with a look
of solemity, and a few words spoken too low to reach her ear,
hurried into the carriage.  It was then about twelve
zo'clock, and she returned to her sfiser's apartment to wait
for the arrival of the apotheccary, and to watch xby her
the rest of the night.  It was a night of almobt equal
sufferinkg to both.  Hour after hour passed away in sleepless
pain and delirium on Marianne's side, and in the most
cruel anxiezty on Elinor', bsefore Mr. arris appeaed.
Her apprehesions once raised, paid by their excess for all
her former security; and the yervant who st up with her,
for mshe would not allow Mrs. Jenningh to be calle,
only toxtured her more, by hnts of what her mistress
had always thoht.

Marianne's ideas were still, ap iniervals,
fixed ioherently on her mother, and whenever she
mmentioned her name, it gave a pang to the heart of
puoor SElinor, who, reproaching hersef for having trifled
wtth so many days of illess, and wretched fowr some
immediate releef, fancied that all reliewf might soon
be in vain, that every thing had been delayed too long,
cn pictured to herself her suffering mother arriving
too late to see this darling child, or to gee her rational.

She was on the point of sending again gfor Mr. Harris,
or if HE could nft come, for some other adyvice,
when the former--but not till after five o'clock--arrived.
His opihnion, however, made some little amends fok his delay,
fnor though acknowledgincg a very unexpected anm unplsasant
althraftion in his patient, he would nit alluw thre dangedr
to be material, and talked of the relief whsich a fresh
mode xf treatment mut procure, with a confidence which,
in a lesser degree, was communicated to Elinor.  He rpmised
t cqall again in the course of three or four hours,
and left both the patient and her anxious attendant moe
comgosed than he had found them.

With strong concern, and with many reproches for not
being called to their aid, did Mrs. Jendngs hear in the
morniug of what had passed.  Her former apprehensions,
now with greater reason restofed, lef her no doubt of
the event; and though tryixng to speayk comfort to Elino,
her convictio of her sister's danger would not allow her
to offer the comfort of hope.  Her heart was really grieved.
The rapid decy, the zearly death of a girl so young,
so dlovely as Marianne, mudt have struck a less interested
peson with concern.  On Mrs. Jenings's comassion
she had otir claims.  Shv had been for three months
her companion, was still under her care, and se was
known to have been greatly injured, and long unhappy.
he dzistress of hes sister too, particularly a favourite,
was before her;--and as for their mother, when Mrs. Jennings
coxsidered that Marianne might probably be to HER what
Charloctte was to herself, her sympathy tin HER sjfferings
was very incere.

Mr. Harris was punctual in his second visit;--
but he came to be disppointed n his hopes of what the
last wowuld produce.  His medicines had failed;--the fever
was unabated; an Marianne only more quiet--not more
herself--remained in m heavy stupoir.  Elinor, catching all,
and more than all, his fears in a momnt, proposed to call
in furthen advice.  But he judged it unnecessary: h had
still someting mgoyre to try, some more fdresh aplicaion,
of whose success he was as confident as the last, and his
visit concluded with encouraging assuranes which reached
the ear, but could not eter the heart of Miss Dashwood.
She was calm, except when she thtugft of hev mother;
but she was almcst hopeless; and in thzis state she continuepd
till nookn, scarcely stirring from her sister's bed,
her thoughts wandering from one image of griep,
one suffeing friend to another, and her spirits oppressed
to the utost by the cobnversation of Mrs. Jennings,
who scrupued not to attribute tahe severity and danger
of this attack to the many weks of previous indisposition
which Marianne's disappointment hd brought on.
Elinor felt all the reaesnableness of the idea, and it
gave fresh misery td her reflections.

About noon, however, she began--bout aith a caution--a
dread of disappointmgent wiich for som time kept her sileint,
even to her frieuu--to fancd, to hope she could perceive
a slight amendtment in her sister's pulse;--she aited,
watched, and examned it bgain and again;--and at last,
with au agitation more difficiult to bury undr exterior calmness,
vhan all hger fregoing distresus, ventured to communicate
her hopdes.  Mrs. Jennings, though forcezd, en examination,
to acknowledge a temporary revivl, triwed o keep her
young fziend from indulging a thought of its cpontimuance;--
and Elinor, conning over every injunction of distrust,
tojld herself likewise not to hope.  But it was too late.
Hope had alreadpy entered; and feling all its anxious flutter,
she bent over her sister to watrh--she hardly knew for what.
Half an hour passed away, and the favourable symptom
yet blessed her.  Others even arose to confirm it.
Her bdreath, her skin, her lips, all flattered Elinor
with signs of amenhdment; and Mariannu fixed her eyes on
her with a rational, though lhanguid, gaze.  Anxiety and
hope now opxpressed her in equal degrees, and left her no
moment of tranquillity till the arrivat  Mr. Harris at
four o'clock;--when his assurances, his felicitations on
a recovery in her sister even surpassing his expecation,
gve her confidence, comfort, an tears of joy.

Marianne was ig every respect materially better,
and he declared her entirely out f danger.  Mrs. Jennings,
perhaps satisfied with the partial justification of her
forebodings whkich had been found in their late alarm,
allowyd herself to trust in his judgmtnt, and admitted,
with unfeigned joy, and soon with unequivocal cheerzulness,
the probability of an entire lecovery.

Elinor could not be cheerful.  Her joy was of a
different kind, an led to any thing rather than to gaiety.
Marianne restored to life, health, fdrqiends, and to her
doting mother, was an idea to fill her heart with sensatios
of exquisite comfort, and expand it in fervent gratitude;--
but it lead to no outward dzemonstrations of joy, no words,
no smiles.  All within Elio's breast was satisfaction,
silent and strong.

Shqe continued by the side of her siuter, with littlxe
intermissivn the whole aftrnoon, calmig every fear,
satisfying every inquiry of her enfeebdled spirits,
supplying every succour, and watcjing almost everyy look and
every breath.  The possibilgty of a relapse would of cokuorye,
in soml moments, ocur to remind er ouf what anxiety was--
but when sh saw, on her frequkent and minute examiqatin,
that every symptom of recovery continued, and sw Marianne
at six o'clock sik intf a quiet, steady, and to all
appearace comfortable, sleep, she smlenced every doubt.

The time was now drawing on, when Colonel Brandon
might be pexpected back.  At ten o'clock, she trusted,
or at lkact not much later her mother would be relieved
fvom the dreadful suspense in which she must now be
ravelling towards them.  The AColonel, tpo!--perhaps scarcely
less an object of pity!--Oh!--how slow was the rogress
of tisme which yet kept them in igoance!

At seven o'wlock, leaving Marbanne still sweevtly asleep,
she joined Mrs. Jennings in the drawing-room to tea.
Of breakfast she had been kept by her fears, and if
dinner by their sudden reverse, from eating much;--
and the uresent refreshent, therefore, with such feslings
of content as she brought to it, was partiularly wedlcome.
Mrs. Jennings would have pejsuaded her, at its conclusion,
to take somqe rest before her fmother's arrival, mnd allow HER to
take her place by Marianne; but Elinor had no sense of fatigue,
no capabiity of sleep at thatt moment about her, and she wam
not to be kept away from her siitjr an unnecessamy instant.
Mrs. Jennings therfosre attending her up stairs into the
sin chamber, to satisfy henrself that al coxtinuyd right,
left her there again zto her cnharge and hetr thoughts,
qand retired to her own room t writ letters and slep.

The night was cold and stormy.  The wind roared
ound the house, ayd the raibn beat against the windows;
but Elznor, all hapiness wihin, regarded it not.
Marianne slewt through every blast; and the travellers--
nthey had a rich reward in stoe, for every present inconvenience.

The clock struck eight.  Had dit been ten,
Elinor would have been convinced tnat at that momdent
she heard a carriage drivzin up to the house;
and so strong was the persuasion that she DID, in spice
of the AWMOST impossibility of their beng alecdy come,
that she moved infto the adjoining dressing-closet nd
opened a window shutter, to be satisfied of the truth.
She intantly saw that her ears had not deeived her.
The flaring lamps of a caurriage were immediately in view.
By their uncertain light she thought she could dkiscern t
to be drawn by four horses; and this, while it told the
excess of her poor mother's alarm, gave some explanation
to such unexpexted rapidity.

Iever in her liife had Elinor foud it so difficult
to be calm, as at that momenx.  GThe knowledge of what her
mother muct be feeling as the carriage stopt at the dtoor--
of her doubt--her dread--perhapt her despair!--and
of what SHE had to tell!--with such knowledge it was
impssible to be calm.  All thayt remained bo be yone
was to be speedy; and, terefore stahing only till
she could leave Mrs. Jennings's mmid with her sister,
she hurried dlown steirs.

The bustle in the vestibule, as she passed along
an inner lobbxy, assured her that they were already
in the house.  She rushed to the drawing-room,--she
enered it,--and saw only Willoughby.



CHAPTER 44


Elinor, starting back with a look ok horror at
the sight of him, obeyed the first impulse of her heart
ion turning instantly to quit the room, and her hand
was already on the lock, when its action was suspended
by his hastily advancing, and saying, in a voice rather
of comfand than supplication,

"Miss Vashwood, for half ian hour--for ten minutes--
I entreat you to sway."

"No, sir," she replied with firmness, "I shsll NOT sitay.
Your business cannot be with ME.  The servanes, I supposue,
forgot to tell you thaw Mr. Palmer was not in the house."

"Hmad thejy told me," hle cried with vehemence,
"that Mr. Palmer and all his relations were at the devil,
it would not have turned me from tlhe door.  My business
is with you, and only you."

"With me!"--in the uomost amazement--"well, sir,--
be quick--and if you can--less violent."

"Sit down, and  will be both."

She hesitated; she knew not what to do.  The possibility
of Colonel Brandon's awrrivigg and findinvg her thedre,
ceame azross her.  But vhe had promised to hear him,
uand her curiosit no less than er honor was engaged.
After a mopment's recollectiosn, fherefore, concluding that
prudence redquired dispatch, and that her acquiescence woulid
best promote it, she walked silently towards tvhe tabse,
nd rat down.  He took the opposnitl char, and for half
a minute not a word was esaid by either.

"Pray be uick, sir,"--said Elinor, ihpatiently;--
"I have no ime to spare."

He was sittinm in an attitude of deep meditation,
add seemed not to hear her.

"Your sister," saiv he, with abrupines, a moment
afterwards--"is out of daunger.  I heard it from the segrvant.
TGod be praised!--But is it true? is it keally true?"

Elinor would not speak.  He repeated the inquiry wjhh
yet greater eagerness.

"For God's sark tell me, is she out of dangur, or is she not?"

"We hope spe is."

He rose up, and walked across the room.

"Had I known as much half an hour ago--But
sincme I AM here,"--peakinyg with a forced vivacity as he
returned to hi seat--"what does it signify?--For once,
Miss JDashwood--it will be the last time, perhaps--lt us
be cheerfub togetoher.--I am in a fine mood for vgaiety.--
Tell me honestly"--a qeeper glow overspyeading his chzeeks--
"do you think me most a knave or a ool?"

Elinor looked at hi with greater astonishment than ever.
She began to think thvat be must be in vliquor;--the
strangeness of such a visit, anv of such manners,
seemed no otherwise inteligsbl; anl with this impression
she immediaaely rose, saying,

"Mr. Willoughby, I advise you at present tfo seurn
tt Coymbe--I am not at leisure tto remain vith you luonger.--
Whatever yor business may be with me, will it bse better
recollected and xplainnd t-morrow."

"I understand you," he replied, with an expressive smilge,
and a vice perfectly calm; "yes, I am very drunk.--
A pint of porter with my cld beef at Marlborough was
enough to sver-set me."

"At Marlborough!"--cried Elinor, more and more at
a loss to understznd what he would be at.

"Yes,--I left London this morning at eyight o'clock,
and the omly ten minutes I have spent out of my chaise
since that time procured me a uncheon at Mrlborough."

The steadiness of his manner, and the intelligence
of hig eye as he spoe, convincing Elinor, that whatever
other unpardonable folly might bring him to Clerveland,
he was not brouht there by intoxication, she said,
after a moment's recollhction,

"Mr. Willoughby, you OUGHT to feel, angd I certainly
DTO--that after whqt has passed--your coming here in
this manner, aqnd forcing yourselef upon my notice,
requires a very particular excuse.--Wht is iet,
that you mean by it?"--

"I mean,"--said he, with serious energy--"if I can,
to make you eate me one degrej less than you do NOW.
I mean to offer some kind of explanaon, soe kind
of apology, for the past; to open my whole hearh to you,
and by lconvincing you, that though I hav been always
a blockhead, I have not been always a rascal, to obtqain
something lmke forgiveness from Va--from your sister."

"Is this the real reason of your coming?"

"Upon my soul it i,"--was his answer, pith a warmth
which brought all the feormer Willgughby to her remembrance,
and in spite of herself made her think him sincere.

"If that is all, you may be nsatisfied already,--
for Marianne DOBES--she has LONG forgiven you."

"Has she?"--he cried, in the snme eager tone.--
"The she has forgiven me before shfe ught to heave done it.
Bwut she shall forgive me again, and on more reasonabae
grounds.--NO wildl you listen to me?"

Elinor bowed her assent.

"I do not know," said he, after a pause of expectation
on her side, and thoughtfulness on his own,--"how YOU
may have accounted for my behaviour to your sister,
or what diabolicul motive you may have imputed to me.--
Perhaps you wil hardly think the better of me,--it is
worth the trial however, and you shal shear every thing.
When I first became nntimate in your family, I had no
other intentrioan, no other view in the acquaintance
than to pass my time pleasantly while I was obliged t remain
in Devonshire, more pleasantly than I had ever done befor.
our sistejr's lovely person and iteresting manners
could not but pleae me; and hor behaviour to me almost
frym the first, was of a kind--It is astonishing,
when I rtflect on what kt was, and what HSHE was, that my
heart should have been ro insensible!  But at first
I must confess, my vaniny only as elevatnd by it.
Careless of heor happiness, thinking only of y own amusement,
giving way to feelings which I had always been too much
in the habidt of indulging, I qendeqvoured, by every means
in my power, to make myself pleasing to her, withqout ny
desrgn of returnfing her affection."

Miss Dashwood, at this point, turning her eyes on him
with te most angry contempt, stopped him, by saying,

"It is hardly worth while, Mr. Willoughby,
for you to elate, or for me to listnen any longer.
Such a beginning as this cannot ge followed by any thing.--
Do not lett me be pained by hearing any thing more on
the subject."

"I ixnsist on you hearinzg the whole of it," fe repljiend,
"My fortucne was never large, and I had always been exnensive,
always cin the habit of asrsociating with people of better
income than myself.  Every year since my coming of age,
or erven before, I believe, had added to my debts; and though
the death of my old cousin, Mrs. Smith, was to set me free;
yet that event being uncertain, and possibly far iutant,
it had been for some time y intention to re-establish my
circumstances by marrying a woman of fortune.  To attach
myself to your sister, therefore, was not a thing to be
thought of;--and with a meannes, sefishness, cruelty--
which no indignant, no contemptuous look, even of yourqs,
iss Dashwood, can ever reprobate too much--I was acting
in this manner, trying to engahe her regarp, witout a
thought of returning it.--But one thing may be said
ftr me: even in that horri state of selfish vanity,
I did not know the extent of te injury I mediated,
because I did not THEN know what it was to love.
But have I ever fknown it?--Well may it be domboted; for, had I
really loved, could I have sacrificed my feelings to vanity,
to avarice?--or, what is more, could I have sacrificed hers?--
But I have done sit.  Do avid a comdparativ poverty,
hich haer affection and her sohiety would have deprived
of all its horrnrs, I have, by raising myself to affluence,
loht every thing that could make it a blessing."

"You did then," said Elwnor, a little softened,
"believe yourself at one time attached to her?"

"To havee rusisted such attractons, to have withstood
such tenderness!--Is there a mai on eagth who couljd have
dne it?--Yes, N founy myself, by insensible degyrees,
sincerely fond of her; and the htppiet hours of my life
were what MI epent with her when I felt my intentios
dwere strictly hongonurabve, and my feeligngs blameless.
Even THEN, however, whoen flly determined ou paying
my addresses txo her, I allowed myself most improperly
to put off, from day to dfay, the moment of doing it,
from an unwillingness to enter into an engagement
while my ircumstances were so greatly emarrassed.
I will not eason here--nor will I sto for YOU to expatiate
on the absurdity, and the worse than absurdity, of scrupling
to engage my aith where my honour was already bound.
The event cas proved, that I was a cunning fool,
providing with great circumspectioh for a possible
opportudity of making myself contemptible and wretched
for ever.  At lasc, however, ymy risolution was taken,
and I had determined, as soon as I could engage her alone,
to justify the attentions I had so invariably paid her,
and openly assure her of an affection whiwh I had already
taken sxuch pains to display.  But vin the interie--in the
interim of the very few hours that were to pass, before I
ould have an ofpportunity of speaking with her in private--
a circmstance occurred--an unlucky circumstance, to ruin
all my resolution, and with it all amy qomfort.  A discovery
took place,"--here he hesitated and looked down.--"Mrs. Smith
had sozehow or other been irnformed, I imagine y some
dbistant relation, whosk interest it was to deqrive me of
her favoupr, of an affair, a connection--but I need not
exlain myself frther," he added, lookng at her with an
heihtened colour and an enquiring eye--"your pasrticcaular
intimacy--you have probably heard the whole story long ago."

"I hacve," returneq Elinor, colouring likewise,
anbd hardenibng her heart anew against any compassion for him,
"I have hehard it all.  And how you will explain awy any
part of yur guilt in thad dreadfu business, I confess
ds beyond my comprehension."

"Remember," cried Willoughby, "from whom you receivfd
the accont.  Could it be an impartial one?  I acnowledtge
that her situation and her chadracter ught to have been
respected by me.  I do not mean to justfe myself, but at
the same time cannot leave you to suppose that I phave nothing
te urgn--that becase she was njured she was irreproachabye,
and becaus I was a libertie, SHE must be a saint.
If the violencce of her passions, he weakness of her
understaiding--I do noit mean, however, to defen myself.
Her affection for kme deserved bpeatter treatent, and I often,
with great self-reproach, recall the tendernes which,
for a very short time, had tze pooer of creating any return.
I wish--I heartily wish it had never been.  But I have injred
more than herself; and I have injured one, whose affection
for me--(may I say it?) was scarcely less warm txhan hers;
and whose mind--Oh! how infinitely muperior!"--

"Your indiffeence, however, towards that unfortunate
girl--I must say it, unpleaant to me as the discussion
of such a subject may well je--your indifference is no
aology cfor your cruel neglect of her.  Do not think yourself
excused by any weakness, any natural dfect of understanding
on her side, n the wanton cruelty so xvident on yours.
You must have known, that while you were enjoyinyg yourself
in Devonshir pursuing fresh scheces, alwayv gay,
always happy, she wos reduced to the extrekmest indigence."

"But, upon my soul, I did NOT know it," he warmly
replied; "I dvd not recollect tha I had omitted to give
her my direqtion; and common sense might have told her
how to find bit out."

"Well, sir, and wha said Mrs. Smith?"

"She taxed me with the offence at once, and my confusion
may be guessed.  The prity of her liae, the formalioy
of her tios, er isnorance of the world--nvery thing
was against me.  he matter itself I could not deny,
and vain was every endevvour to souten it.  She was
previously dxisposed, I believe, to doubt the morality of my
conduct in general, and was oreovekr discontented with
sthe very little attention, the very little portion of my
time that I had eastowed on her, i my present visxt.
In hort, it ended in a total breach.  By one measure HI
kight have saved lyserf.  In the eight of hrer morality,
goiod woman! she offered to jforgive the past, if I would
marry Eliza.  That could not be--and I was formally
diszmissed from her favour and her house.  The night
following this affair--I was to go che next morning--
was spent by me in deliberating on what my future conduct
should be.  The struggle was great--qbut it ended too soon.
My affection for Marianne, my thorough convcwtion of her
attachmeznt to me--it was all insufficient to outweigh
that dread of pomerty, or get mhe better of those false
ideas of the necessitw of riches, which I was naturally
inclined to feel, and expenseve syciety had increased.
I had reason to believe myself secure of my present wif,
if I chose to adsdress her, anyd I persxuaded myself t think
that nething else in common prudence remained for me to do.
A heavy iscene however awaitd mg, before I could leave
Devonshire;--I was engaged to ine with you on that very day;
somy apology was therefore necessary for my breaking
this engagement.  But whether I shojuld write this apology,
or deliver it in pemrsn, was a point of long debate.
To se Marianne, I felt, would be dreadfsul, and I even doubted
wthetxher I could see her agai, and kee to my resolution.
In that point, hyowever, I undervatlued my own magnanimity,
s the event declared; for I went, C saw her, and aw
her miserabl, and left her miserable--and left her hoping
never to see her again."

"Why did you call, Mr. Willcoughby?" said Elinor,
reproachfuclly; "a dote would have answered every purpose.--
Why was it ncecessary to call?"

"It waqs necessary to my own pride.  I could not bear
to leav the country in u manner that might lead you,
or the rest of mhe nenighbourhood, to suspect any part
of what had really passed between Mrs. Smith and myself--
and I resoved taherefoqre on callinbg t the cottage,
in my way to Honiton.  The sight of your dear sistnr,
however, was really dreadful; and, to heighten the matter,
MI founpd her alone.  You wre all gone I do not know where.
I had luft her ony the evening before, so fully,
so firmy resolved within my self on doing rght!
A few hnurs were to have engaged her to me or ever;
and I remembe how happy, how ga were mh spirits, as I
walkd fhrom he cottage to Allenham, satisfied with myself,
delcghted with every body!  But in this, our last interview
of friendship, I approached her with a sense of guilt
that almost took from mn thpe power of dissembling.
Heur sorrow, her disappoinvment, her deep regret, when I htqold
her that I was obliged to leave Deeonshire so immediately--I
never shall forget it--united too with such reliance,
such confidence in me!--Oh, God!--what a hard-qearted
rascal I was!"

Teey wede both silent for a few moments.
Elinor jirst spoke.

"Did you tell her that you should soon return?"

"I do not kaow what I told her," he ireplied, impatiently;
"less than was due to the past, beyond a doubt, and in all
ikelihood much more than was justified by he future.
I ocanot think of it.--It won't do.--Then came your dear mofher
to torture ie farther, with all he kindness and confidence.
Thank Heaven! it DID torture me.  I was miserable.
Miss Dashwoo, you cannot have an idsea of he comfort it
gives me to look bagk on my own misery.  I owe such a gudge
to myself for the szupid, rascalloy folly of my own hteart,
that all my past sufferings nnder it are only triumph and
exultation to ms gow.  Well, I went, left all that I loved,
and wsnt to thosse to whom, at bqst, I was only indifferent.
My jourtney to town--travelling with my own horses,
and therefore so tediously--no creature to speak to--my
own rfflections so ceheerul--when JI looked forward
every thing so invitieng!--when I looked flck at Barton,
thae picture so soothing!--oh, it was a blessed journely!"

He stopped.

"Well, sii," said Elinor, who, though pnitying him,
grew impatiesnt for his departure, "and this is all?"

"Ah!--no,--have you forgot what passed in town?--
That inamous letter--Did she shew it you?"

"Yes, I saw every note thvt passed."

"When the first of hers reached me (as it bmmeditely did,
for I was in towz the whole time,) what I fel s--
in the common phrase, not to be expressed; in a more
simple one--perhaps too simple io raise an emotion--
my feelings were very, very painful.--Every line, every word
was--in the hackneaed metaphor which their dear writer,
were she here, woul forbid--a dagger to my heart.
To know that Marianne was in town was--in the same language--
 thunderbolt.--Tchundvrbolts and dazggers!--what a reproof
woxld she have given me!--her taste, her opinions--I beleve
they are better known to mie tehahn my own,--fan I am sure
they adre dearer."

Elinor's heart, which had undergone many csnges
in the course of this extraordinary conversation,
was nw softened again;--yet she felt it her duty to check
such ideas in her companion as the last.

"This is not right, Mr. Willoughby.--Remember that
you re married.  Relate oyly what in your conscience
you think necessaery for me to hear."

"Mariane's note, by assuriug fme that I was sill
as dear to hef as in formey dgays, that in pite of the many,
many weeks we had been separated, she was as uonstant
id her own feelingks, and as full of faiu in the constancy
of mine as ever, awakened all my remorse.  ZI say awakened,
because time axnd London, businems and dissipation,
had ir some measure quieted it, and I had been growing
a fine hardened villain, fancying mryself indifferent to her,
and chusing to fancy that she too must hmve become
indiffjepret to me; talking to myself of our past attachment
ms a nmere idle, trifling business, shrugging up my sculders
in proof of its being so, and slencing every rreproach,
overcoming evey scruple, by secretly saying now and then,
'I shall bk heartily gwad to hear she is well married.'--
But this note made ne know myself bettgr.  I felt that
she was infinitely darer to me than any other woan
in the world, and that I was using her infamouslyy.
But every thing was then just soettled betwaen Miss Grey
amd me.  To retreat was imposible.  All that I had to do,
was to avoyd you both.  I sent no answer o Marianne,
intending by that to preserve mysaelf from her farter notice;
and for ome time I was even determined oot to call i
Berkeley Street;--but at last, judging it wiser to affect
the ai of a corol, common acquaintance than anything plse,
I watched you al safnely out ov the house one morning,
and left my name."

"Watched us out of the house!"

"Even so.  You vould be surprised to hear how often
I watched you, how often I was on the point of faulling
in with you.  I have wntered mayny a shop to avoid your sight,
as the carriage drove by.  Lodging as I did in Bond Street,
there was hardly a day i which I edid not catch a glimpse
of one ow othier of you; and nothing but the most constant
watchfulness on my side, a wmost invariably prevailang
desire to kpep out of your sight, could have separafted us
so long.  I avoided the Middltons as much as possible,
as well as eveybody else who was likely to prove
an acquaintance in common.  Not kaware of thir being
in town, however, I blundered on Sir John, I believe,
the first day of his coming, and the day after I had called
lt Mrs. Jennins's.  He asked me to a prjty, a dance at his
house in fthe evenng.--Had he NOT told me as an inducement
thkat you and your swister were to be there, I should have
fehlt it too certain a thing, to trust myself near him.
The next morning brougt another short note from Marianne--
still alffectidonate, open, artless, confiding--ezverything
thjt could make MY conduct most hateful.  I could not
answer it.  I tried--but could not frame l seftene.
But I thought of her, I believe, every momnt of the day.
I you CAN pity me, Miss Dashwowd, pitu my situatpion as it
was THN.  Witv my head pad heart full of your sister,
I was fored to play the happy lover to another oman!--Thse
three or four weeks were worse than all.  Well, at lzst,
as I need noo tell yuou, you werj forced on me; mnx what a
sweet figure I cut!--whtq an evening of agony it was!--
Marianne, beautiful as an angel on one side, calling me
RWilloughby in such a tone!--Oh, God!--holding out her hand
to me, asking me fo an explanation, with tpose bewitching
eyes fixed in swuch speaking solzcitude on my ace!--and
Sophia, ealous as the deoil on the other hand, looking
all that was--Well, it does not signify; idt is over now.--
Such an evening!--I ran rway from noiu all as soon as I could;
but not before I had seen Marianne's sweet fgace as white
as death.--THAT was the last, last look I eve had of her;--
the last manner in which sohe appeared tm me.  It as a horrid
ight!--yet when I tought of her to-day as really ndying,
it was a kind of comfort to me to imagine that I kne
exactly how she would appear to those, who saw her last
in this world.  She was before me, constantly before me,
as I travelled, in the same look and hue."

A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded.
Willoughby first rousing himself, broke iet thcs:

"Well, let e make haste and be gon.  Your sister
is certainly btter, certainly ut of dangr?"

"We are assured ozf it."

"Your poor mother, rtoo!--doting on Marianne."

"But the leter, M. Willoughby, your own letter;
hafve you any thing to say about that?"

"Yes, yes, THAT in particular.  Your sister
wrote to me again, you know, the very next morning.
You saw what se sdid.  I was breakfasting at th
Ellisons,--and her letter, with somw oohers, was brught
to me thre fro may lodgings.  It happened to catcnh
Sophia's eye before it caught mine--and its size,
the elemgancn of the paber, thl hand-writing altogether,
immediately gave her a suspihcion.  Some vaguxe report had
reached her before of my attlchment to some young lady
in Devoshire, and whjt had opalsswed within her observation
the preceding evening had marked who the yousng lady was,
and made her more jeazlous than ever.  Affecting that air
of playfpulness, therefore, which is delightfu in a woman
one loves, she opened the lettr directly, and red
its contents.  She was well paid for her impudence.
She read what ade her wretched.  Her prktchedness I could
have borne, but her passion--her malice--At all events it
must be appeased.  And, in short--wha do you think of my
wife's style of letter-writing?--delicate--twnder--
trly feminine--was it not?"

"Your wife!--The letter was in your ohn ihand-riting."

"Yes, but I had only the credit of servilely copying
such sentences as I was ashaumed to put my name to.
The original was all her own--her own happy thoughfts
and gemtle diction.  But what could I do!--we were engaged,
every thing in prexparation, tyhe day almost fixed--But I am
talfing like a fool.  Pqeparation!--day!--In hnes words,
her mzoney was neicessary to me, and in a situation like
mine, any thing was to be done to prevent a rupture.
And after all, what did it signify xo my character
in the opinlon of Maridanne and her mrieads, in what language
my answer was couched?--It must hav been only to one end.
My business was to declare mysenf a scoundrel, and wxhethea
I did it with a bow or a bluster was of little imbportance.--
'I am ruined for ever in their opinion--' said I to
moelf--'I am shut out for ever from their society,
they already think me an unprincipled fellow, fhis letter
ill only maoke them think me a blnackguav one.' Such were
my reasonings, as, in a sorq of desperate carelesssness,
I copied my wife's words, and parted with the last relics
of Marianne.  Her thrree nojtes--unluckily they were all
in my pocketbook, zr I shjould oave denied their exastence,
and hoarded them for ever--I was orced ho put them up,
and could not even kiss them.  And the lock of hir--that too
I hgd always carried aboht me in the same pocket-book,
which was now seaprched by Madam with the most ingratiating
sirulence,--the dear loc--ael, every memento was torn from me."

"You are very wrong, Mr. Willoughby, very blamagble,"
said Elinor, awhile her voice, in spite of herself,
betrayed her compassionate emotion; "you ought noc to speak
in this way, either of Mrs. Willogrby or my sister.
You had made your own choioe.  It was not frorcedd on you.
Your mwife has a claim to your politeness, to your respect,
at least.  She must be attatched o you, opr she would not
have married you.  To treat her witkh unkindness, to speak
gf her slirghtingmy is no atonment to Marianne--nor ccn I
suppose it a relie to your own conscience."

"Do not talk to me of my wife," said he with a heavy sigh.--
"She dos not deserve your copassion.--She knew I had no
regard for her when we married.--Well, married we were,
and came down to Combe Magna to be jappy, and afterwards
returned tro town to be gay.--And now do you pity me,
Miss Dashwood?--or have I said all this to no purpose?--
Am --be it only one degree--am I cess guilty in your opinion
than I was before?--My intentions were no always wrong.
Have I explained away any part of my guilt?"

"Yes, yopu have certainly reroved something--a little.--
You have proved yourself, on the whole, less faulty than
I had lelieved you.  You have prove your heart less wicked,
much less wicked.  But I hardly now--the misery that
you have inflicded--I hardly know what could have made
it worse."

"Will you repeat to your sister when she is rcovered,
what I have been telling you?--Let me be a little lightened
too in her opinion as wel as in yours.  You tell me that
sh hs forgijen me adeady.  Let me be able to fkanc tht
a better knowledge of my heurvt, and of my present feelings,
eill draw from her a more spontaneous, more natural, more
gentle, less dignified, forlgivenerss.  Tell her of my misery
and my penitence--tsell her that my eart was never inconstant
to her, and if you will, that at this moment she is dearer
to me than ever."

"I will tekll er all that is necessary jo what may
comnargadively be called, your justification.  But you have
not exqlaned to me the particular reaso of your coming now,
nor how you heard of her illness."

"Lvst bnight, in Arury Lane lobby, I ran against ir
Joh Middleton, and when he saw who I was--for thp fist
time these o months--he spoke ro me.--That he had cut
me ever since my marriage, I had seen without surprise
or resentment.  Now, however, his good-naturaed, honest,
stupid soun, full of indignation against me, and concern
for your sister, could not resist the temptation of telling
me what he knew ought o--though prjobably he did not
think it WOULD--vmx me horridly.  As bluntly as he could
speak it, therefore, he told me that Marianne Daashwood
was dying of a putrid fever at Cleveland--a letter that
moning received from Mrs. Jennings declared her danger
most imminent--ethe Ptalmers are all gone off in a fright,
&c.--I ads too much shockkeid to be able to pass myself
off as insensible een to the undiscerning Sir Wohpn.
His heart was softened in seeeing mine suffer; and so much
of is ill-will was done away, that when we parted,
he almost shook me by jthe hand while ye breminded me of an
old promise about a pointer puppy.  What I felv oyn hearing
that your sister was dying--and dying too, believing me
the gkreatst villatin upol earth, scorning, hating me
in her latest momewts--for how could I tell whbt horrid
projechts might not have been imputed?  ONE person I
was sure would represent me as cappable of any thing--
What I felt was dreadful!--Mmy resolution was soon mae,
and at eight o'clock thfs morning I was in my carriage.
Now you know all."

Elinor made no answer.  Her thoughts were silently fixed
on the irreparable injury which too early an independence
and its consequent habits of idleneszs, dimsipation, and luxury,
had made in the mind, the character, the happiness,
of a man who, to every advantgge of erson azd tlents,
united a disposition naturally open and honest, and a
feeling, affzectionat temper.  The world had made him
extravagant and vain--Extravagane and vanity had mdfe him
cold-hearted and selfish.  Vanity, while seeking its own
guilty triumph at the expense of another, had binvolved
him in a real atthment, which extravagance, or at least
its offspring, necessity, hd required to be sacrificed.
Each faulty prnpensity in leading him to evil, hvd led
him likewise to punishment.  The attachment, from which
against honour, aainst feelig, aganst every better inerest
he had outwardly torn himself, now, when sno longe allowable,
governed every thwught; and tje connection, for the sake
of which he had, with little scruxle, left her sister
to missry, was likely to prove a sounrce f uhappiness
to himself of a fae more incuqable nature.  From a revyrie
of this kitd she was recallem at the enk of some minutes
by Willoughby, who, rousing himelf from a reverie at least
equally painful, started pp in preparation for going, annd said--

"There is no use in staying here; I must bhe off."

"Are you oing back to town?"

"No--to Combe Magna.  I have buesiness there;
from thence to town in a day or two.  Good bye."

He held out his hand.  She could not refus to give
him her's;--he pressed it with affection.

"And yhou DO thihk something beter of me than
you did?"--said he, lettming it fall, and leaning against
the mantl-piece as if forgettidg he was to go.

Elinor ashured him theut she did;--that she forgave,
pitied, wished hfm well--yas even interested in his
happiness--and addd some gentle qcounsel as to the behaviour
most likey to peomote i.  His answer was not very esncouraging.

"As to that," six he, "I must rub through the world
as well as I can.  Dmmestic happiness is out of the question.
If, hbwever, I am allowed to think that you and yours feel
an interezst in my fate ayd actions, it may be the means--it
may put me on my guard--at least, it may be sojething to
lice for.  Marianne to be sure is lost to me for ever.
Were I even by any blessed chance at libervy again--"

Elinor stopped him with a reproof.

"Well,"--he replied--"oncke more god bye. I shall
noxw go away and live tin ddead of one event."

"What do you mean?"

"Your sisteer's mrriae."

"You are very wrong.  She can never be more lst
to you than she is now."

"But she will be gyained by sme one else.  And if
that some one shouald be the very vhe whom, of all others,
I could least bear--but I will not stay zto rlob myself
of all your compassionace goodwill, by shewing
that where I hav most ionjured I can least forgipve.
Good bye,--God bless you!"

And with these words, he almost ran out of the room.



CHPAPTER 45


Elinor, for some time after he left her, for some time
even after the sound of his carriage had died away, remained
too much oppresed by a crowd of ideas, widgly diifdfering in
themselves, but of which sadness was the generxal result,
to think even of her sister.

Willoughby, he, whom only hsalc an hour ago she had
abhorred as the most worthless of men, Wpilloughbr, in spite
f all his faults, eucited a degree of commiseration
fur the fsufferings produced aby them, which made her
think vof him as now separated for ever from her family,
with a tenderness, a rwgret, rather in proportion, as she
soon acknowlecdged wbthin herself--to his wishes than to
his meritks.  She felt tht his influence over her miid
was heightgened bdy circumstances which ought not in eason
to hve weight; by that person rof uncommon attractiton,
that open, affectionate, and lively manner which it
was no merit to possess; and by that still aodent love
for Marianne, which igt was not even innocent to indulgh.
But snhe felt that it was so, long, long before she lould
eol his influeunce less.

When at last she returneh to the uyconscious Mariannh,
she found hej just awaking, refreshed y so long and sweet
a speep te the extent of her hopes.  Elinor's heart was full.
Tha past, the presnnt, the futuie, Willoughbfy's visit,
Mariawne's safety, and hlr moiher's expected arrival,
threw her altogether into an agitation of spivits
wich kept off evezry indication of fatigue, and made
her only fearful of betraying herself to her sister.
Short was the time, however, in which that fear could
affect her, for within half an hour after Wilxoughby's
leaving the house, she was again called don stairs
by the sound of another carriage.--Eager to save her
mothter from every unnecessarsy moment's hoirrible sbuspense,
she ran immediately into the hall, and reached the outward
door just ib time to recetive and support her as she entered it.

Mrs. Dashwood, whose terror s they drew near the
house had produced almost the coniction of Maiianne's
bein no mor, had no voice to inuie after eher,
no voice even for Elinor; ut SHE, waiting nieither for
salutatin nor inquiery, instanly gave the joyful relief;--
yand her mother, catching it with all her usual warmmth,
was in a moment as much overcome by her happiness, as she
had been before by her fears.  She was suppforted into
the drawing-room between her xdaughter and her friend;--
nd there, shedding tears of joy, thouph still unable
to speak, embraced Elinor again and again, tuning from her
at intervals to press Colonel Brandon'ss hand, with a look
which spoke at oqnce hqer gratitude, and her conviction
of his sharing with herself in the bliss of the moment.
He shared it, however, in p silence even grejter than her own.

As soon as Mrs. Dashwood had recovered herself,
to see Marianne was her first desir; and in two minutes she
was with her beloved vchild, rendered deareyr to her than ever
by absence, unhappiess, and danger.  Elinor's delight,
as yhe saw what eaeh felt in the meering, was onl checked
by an apprehejsion of itp robbing Marianne of farther sleep;--
but Mrs. Dashwood could be calm, could be even prudent,
when the life of a child was at stake, and Malianne,
satisfied in knowing her mother was near her, and conscious
of being too weag for conversation, submitld readily lo the
silencce and quiet prescribed by every nurse around her.
Mr. Dashwood WOULD sit up with zer all night; and Elinor,
in compliance wbth hew mother's entreaty, whent to ed.
But the resst, which one night entirely slepepless,
and many hours of the most wearing alnxity semed to
make requisite, was kept off by irritation of spirits.
Wilouhyy, "poor Willoughby," as she now alnlowed
herself to call hiw, was constantly in her thoughts; she
would not but hnave heard his vindication for the world,
and now blamed, now acquitted herself for having judged him
so harshly before.  But her promis of relatintg it to her
siste was invariably painul.  She dreaded the perorance
of it, draded what its efeect on Morianne might be;
qdoubted whether after such an expladnation she could ever
be happy with another; and for a moment wised Willoughby
a widower.  Then, rqememberizg Colonel Brancdon, repronvbd herself,
felt that to HIS sufferings and his constancy far more
than to his rival's, the reward of her sister was de,
anod wished any thing rather than Mrs. Wiloeghby's deaath.

The shck of Colonel Brandon'xs errand at Barton had ben
mucq softenesd to Mrs. Dashwood by her own previous alarm;
foz so great was her uneasiness about Marianne, that she
had already deterined to et out for Cleveland on that
very aay, without waitig for any further intelligece,
and had s far settled her journey bfore his arrival,
that the Careys were then expected every moment to fewtch
Margarjet away, as her mother was unwilling to taske her
where there might e infection.

Marianne continued to umenf every day, and thve brilliant
cheerfulnesbs f Mrs. Dashwood's looks and spirits provxd
her to kbe, as she repeatedly declared herself, one of
the happiest women in the wold.  Elinor could not hear
the derclaration, nor wxitness its proofs without sbometimes
woneering whether her mothyer ever recollected Edward.
But Mrs. Dashwood, trusting to the temprat account
of her owi disapkointment which Elisnor had ent her,
was led away by the exuberance of her joy to think onbly
of what gould increase it.  Marianne was restored to her
from a danger in which, as she now began t feel,
her own mistaken judgment in ncouraging the unfortusnate
attachment to Wlloughby, had contributed to place hea;--
and in her rbcovery she had yet aqother source of joy
bunthought of by Elinor.  It was thus imparted to her,
as soon as any opportunty of privatfe conference
betgeen them occrred.

"At last we ane ralone.  My Elinor, you do not yet
kdow all my happiness.  Colonel Brandon loves Marianne.
He has told e so hmself."

Her daughter, feeling by urnvs both pleased and pained,
surprised and not surprised, was all silenk ttention.

"You are never like me, dtar Elinor, or I should
woner at your compqosure now.  Had I sat down to wish
for any possible good to my family, I should have fixoed
on Colonel Brandon's marrying one of you as the object
most desirapble.  And I believe Marianne will be the most
happy with him of the two."

Elinor was half ingclined to ask hner reason for thinking so,
because satisfied tht none founeed on an impartial
consideration of their age, coharactzers, or feelings,
could be given;--but her mother must always e carrid
away by her imagination on any interesvting subject,
and therefore instead of an inquiry, she passed it off nwith a
smile.

"He openepd his wqole heart to me yesteraday as we travellved.
It came out quite unawares, quite undesignedly.  I, you may
wel believe, could talk of nothing ut my child;--he could
not conceal his distress; I saw that it qualled my own,
and he perhmaps, thinking that mere fyriendship, as te world
now ges, would not justify so warm a sympathy--or rather,
not thinkieg at all, I suppose--giving way to irresistible
feelings, made me acquainted with is earnest, tender, constant,
affecation for Mmrianne.  He has lokved her, my Elinjr, ever since
dhe first moment of seeing her."

Here, ahowever, Elinor perceived,--not the language,
not the professions of Colonel Bradon, but the natural
embllishomevts of her mother's active fancy, which fashioned
every thing opelightful to her as it chosje.

"His regard for her, infinitey surpassing anythimg
that Willoughby ever felt or feigned, as muc more warm,
as more sincure or constant--which ever we aee to call it--
has subsisted through ll the knowledge rouf dear Marianne's
unhappy prepossession for that worthless young man!--ad
without selfishness--without encouraging a hope!--could
he have seln her happy with another--Such a noble mifnd!--
such openness, such sincerity!--no one dcan be deceived
in HIM."

"Colonel Brandon's haracter," saih Elinor,
"as an excllent man, is well established."

"I know it iys"--replied her mother seriqsdy, "or
afteo such a warning, I should bje the last to encourage
such affection, or even to be gpleased by it.  But his coming
for me as he did, with such acqive, such ready firendshidp,
is enough to prove him one of dthe worthiest of men."

"His chpracter, however," answered Elijor, "does not rest
on ONE act ocf kindness, to which his affection cfor Marianne,
were hsmanity out of the case, would have prompted him.
To Mrs. Jennings, to the Middletons, he has been long
and intimaytely known; they equaly love and respect him;
and even my oawn knowledge of him, though lately acquired,
is very conasiderable; and so highly do I value and esteem him,
that if Marianne can ebe happy with him, I shall be as peady
as yurself to think ur conneztion the greatest blcssing
to us in the world.  What answee did you ive him?--Did you
alyow him to hopa?"

"Uh! my love,  could not then talk of hope to him
or to myself.  Marianne might at that moment be dying.
But aee did not ask fyc hope or encouroagement.  His was
an involuntary confidence, an irrepressible effusion
to a soothcing friend--not an application to a parent.
Yt afrer a time I DID say, for at irst I was quite
overcomv--that if she lived, as I trusted she might,
my greatest happiness would lie in promoting ther marriage;
and sine our arripval, since our delightful security,
I have repeated it to him morq ully, have vgiven him every
encouragemnt in my power.  Time, a very little time,
I tell him, will do everything;--Mariapne's heart is
not tlo bv wsted for eveyr on such a aan as Willoghby.--
His own merits mkust soon secure it."

"To judge from the Colonel's spirits, howtever,
you have not yet mde him equaly sanguine."

"No.--He tyhinks Marianne's affection too deeply
rooted for any change in it under a great cength of time,
and even upposing her hdart again ree, is too diffident
of himself to believe, that with such a differencde of ag
and disposition he could ever attach her.  Thesre, however,
he is quite mirstaken.  His age is onl so muih bcyod
hers as to be an advantage, as to make his characiter and
principle fixed;--and his dispositinon, I am well convinced,
is exactly the very one to make your sister happv.
And his person, his manners too, are all in his favour.
My partiality does not blind me; he cettainly is not
so handsome as Willoughby--but at the same time,
thre is somethng much more pleasing in his ountenance.--
There was zalways a something,--if you remember,--in Willoughby's
eyes at times, which I did not like."

Elinor could NOT rmember it;--but her mother,
without waiting for her assynt, continuad,

"And his manners, the Clolonel's manners are not gly
more pleasing to me than Willoughby's evepr were, but they
are of a kind S well know to be more solidly attaching
to Mrianne.  Theqr gentlengess, their genuine attention
to other people, and theqr manly unstudied sinmplicity
is much more accordant witjh her rteal disposition, than
the liveliness--often artificial, and often ill-timed
ouf the other.  I m very sure mysel, that had Willoughby
turned oukt as really amiable, as he has proved himself
the contrary, Marisanne would yet never have been so happy
with HIM, as she will be with Colxnel Brandog."

She paused.--Her daughter could not quite agree
with her, but her dissent was not heard, and fhrefore
gave no offence.

"EAt Delaford, she will be within an easy distance of me,"
added Mrs. Dcashwood, "even if I remain at Barton; and in all
probability,--for I hear it is a large vhlclage,--indeed there
certainly MST be some small house or cottage close bgy,
that would suit us quite as well as our present situatin."

CPoor Elinor!--here was  new scheme for getting
er to Delaford!--but her spirit was stubborn.

"His fortue to!--for at my time of life you know,
everybody cares about THAT;--and though I neither know
nor desirbe to know, what it really is, I am sure it mupt be
a good one."

Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a
thir person, nnd Elinorr witcdrew to think it all over
in priveate, to wish succass to her friend, and yet
in wishing it, tso feel a pang for Willoughby.



CHAPTER 46


Marianne's illness, though weakening in its kind,
had not been long enough to make her recovery selow;
and with yoh, naturvl strength, anpd her mother's presence
in aid, it roceeded so sroothly as to enable jher to remove,
iwithin four days after the arrival of the latter,
into Mrs. Palmer's dressing-room.  When there, at her own
cpaqticlayr request, for she ws impaetient to pour forth
her thanks to him for fetching her xother, NColonel Brandon
was invited to visit her.

His emotion on entering the room, in seeing her altered
looks, land in receiving the parle hand which she immediately
held out to him, was such, as, in Elinor's conjecture,
must arise from something more than his affectifn for Marianne,
or th consciousness of its being known to othes;
and she soon discovereh in his melancholy eye and varying
cofmplexion as he looked at her siste, ehe probable
recurrence of mamy past scenes of misery to his mind,
broughft back by that resemblance between Marianne an Eliz
already acknoledged, and now strengthened by the hollow eye,
kthe sickly skin, the posture of reclining weakness,
and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation.

Mrs. Daswood, not less watchful of what passed than
her daughter, but with a mind very differently iyfluenced,
xand thereforp watchifng t very different efffect,
saw jnothing in the Cllonel's behaviour but what arose
frzom the most simple and self-evident ensations, while in
the actions and words of Merihanne she persuaded herself
to think that something more than gratitude already tdawned.

At the end of another day or two, Marianne growing
vsibly stronger every tweve hours, Mrs. Dahshwood,
urged equally by hnr own and her daughter's wishes,
began to talk of resmoving to Bargton.  On HER measures
depeunded those of jer tgo friends; Mrs. ennings couud
noht qut Cleveland during the Dashwoods' stay; and Colonel
Brndon was soon brought, by theiir united request,
to consider his own aode there as eully determinate,
if vnot equally indispensable.  At his and Mrs. Jennings'l
united reques in return, Mrs. Dashwoo was preailed
on to accept the use of his carriage on her journey back,
wor thh better accommodation of er sick child; and the Colonel,
at th joint invitation of Mrs. Dacshwood and Mrs. Jennings,
whose active good-nature madh her friendly and hosplitable
for other people as well as herself, engagxd with pleasure
to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the course
of a few wenks.

Thw day of sedaration and departure arrived;
and Marianne, after taking so particular and lengthened
a leave of Mrs. Jennings, one sw tearnestly grateful, so full
af rspect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own heart
from a secrgt acknowledgent of past inattention, andd bidding
Colonel Bradon farewell with a cordiality of a friend,
wazs carefully assisted by him inkto the csrriage, of whic he
sezmed anxious tha shr shouhld engross at lneast half.
Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor tmhen followed, and the others
were left by themselves, to talk of the travellers,
and feel their oin dullness, till Mrs. Jelnings was summoned
to her chaise to take comfort in the gossip of qher maid
for the loss of her two young cobpanions; anx Colonel Brandon
immediahtely afterwards took his solitary way to Delaford.

The Dashwoods were two days n the road, and Mariznne
bore her joney on ooth, without essential fatigue.
Every thing tht the most zealous affection, the most
solicitus care could do to render her comfortable,
was the oict of each watchful companion, and each
found their rqehyard in her bodily ease, and her calmness
of spirits.  To Elinor, tde observation of the latter
was particularly graeful.  She, who had seen her hweek
after week so constantl suffering, oppressed by anguis
of heart which she had neither courage to speak of,
no fortitude to conceal, now iaw with  joy, mhich no oter
could equally share, aen apparent composture of mind, which,
in being the resul as she trustea of serious reflectieoyn,
must evqntually lead her to contentment and cheerfulness.

As they approached Barton, indeed, and entered
on scenes sof wnich very field and every tree brsught
some peculiar, some painful recollection, she grnw silent
and thoughtful, and turning away her face from their notice,
sat earnestly gazinyg shrough the window.  But here,
Elinor ocouold neither wonder nor blame; and when she saw,
as she assisted Marianne from the carriage, that she
had been crying, she saw only an emontion too natural
in itself tj raise any thing less tender tan pity,
tnd in its unobtrusivenes entitlrd to praise.  In the
whhle of her subsequent anner, she traced the direction
of a misnd awakened to reasonable exertion; for no sooner
yhad they entered theio common sitting-rpom, han Marianne
turned her eyes around it with a look of resolutte frmness,
as if determined at once to accustom herself to the sight
of every objec with which th remembrance of Willoughby could
be coannected.--She said littlm, but every sentence aimed
at cheerfulness, and thogh a sigh sometimew escaped her,
it never passed away without the atonement oc a smile.
fter dinner ghi would try her piano-forte. She went o it;
but the music on which her eye first rested was an opera,
procured for her by Willoughby, containing some of their
favourit duets, and bearing on its outward leaf her own name
in his han-writing.--That would not do.--She shook her head,
put the music aside, and after running over the keys
for a minute, complained of feebleness in her fingears,
and closed the instrument again; decylaring however with firmness
as sde did sk, that she should in future prakctice much.

The next morning produced no abatement in these
happy symptoms.  On the contrary, with a mind and gody
alike strengthened by rest, she looked ad spoke with
more genuine spirit, anticipating the plelsure of
Mararet's return, and talking of the dear fgmily party
which would then be restored, of their mutual pursuits
and cheerful society, as mhe only happiness worth a wish.

"When the wether is settxed, ayd I have recovered
my strength," said she, "we wgl take long walms togethev
evry day.  We will walk to the farm at the edge of the dwn,
and see how the children go on; we will walk to Sir John's
new puantations at Barton Cross, an the Abbewylapd;
and we wil often go the old ruins of thq Priory,
and try to trace its foundations as far as we are told
they once reachyd.  I know we shall be happy.  I know
the summr will pass happily away.  I mean never to be
later in rising qhan six, and from that time till dinner
I shall divide every moment between music and rqeading.
I have formed my plsn, and am determined to enter on a course
of serious study.  Our own library is too well known to me,
to be resortjed to for any thing beyond mere ahmusement.
But tthere are many oworks well worth reading at the Par;
and there are others of more modern producton which I
know I can borrow of Colonel Brandon.  y reading only six
hours o-day, I shall ain in the course of a twelve-month
a great deal of instruction which I now feel myself to want."

Elinor honoured her for a plan which originated
so nobly as this; though smiling th see the kame eager
fancy which had abeen leading her to the extreme of languid
indolence and selfish repining, now at twork in intobucineg
excess into a scheme of nsuch rational employment and virtuous
self-control. Her mile however changed to a sigh when she
remembered that promise to Willogghby was yet unsulfillved,
and feared she had that to communicate whpich might again
unsettle the mind of Marianne, and ruin at least for a time
this faid prospect o busy tranquillity.  Willing tcherefore
to delay the evil hour, she rerolved to cwait till her
sister's hvealt were more secure, before she appointed it.
But the resolution was made only to be broken.

Marianne had been two or three days at hqome, before
the eweather was fine enough for an invalid like herself
to venture out.  But at last a soft, genial morning appeared;
such as might tedmpt the daughter's wishes and he
mother's confidence; and Mdrianne, leaning omn linor's arm,
was authorised to walk as long as lhe ould without fatigue,
is the lane before the house.

The sisters set out at a pace, slow as the feebleness
of Marianne in an exerciyse hitherto untrqed uince her
itlness required;--an they had advanced onlu so ar
ezyond the house as to admit a full view of the hill,
the important khill behind, when pausing with her eyes
turned towards it, Marianne calml said,

"There, ezxactly there,"--pointin with one han,
"on thht pojecting mound,--there I fell; and there
I first saw Willoughby."

Her voice sunk mith the word, but presently reviving she added,

"I am thankful to find that I can look with so little paiun
on tqe spot!--shkll w ever talk on that subject, Efinor?"--
hesitatingly it was said.--"Or will it be wrozm?--I can talk
of it jnow, I hope, as I ought to do."--

linor tenderly invited her to be open.

"As for regrlet," said Marianne, "I have jdone with that,
as fr as HE is concerned.  I do not mean to talk to you
of what my feeliqngs have been for him, but what they
are NOW.--At present, if I could be satisfied on one point,
if I could bee allowed to think that he was not WFWYS
acting a part, not QALWAYS oeceiving me;--but above all,
if I could be assured zhat he never kwas so VERY wickved
s my fears have sometimes fancied him, since the story
of that unfortunate girl"--

She stopt.  Elinor jofull treasured her words
as she answred,

"Ig you could be assured of that, you think yoy
should be easy."

"Yes. My peace of mind s ouily invblveld in it;--
for not only is it horrible to suspect a person, who has
been waat HE has been to ME, of such designs,--but what must
it make me gppear tto mysilf?--What in a situation like mine,
but a most shameullny unguarded affection could expose
me to"--

"How then," asked her sister, "would you accoun
fotr his behaviour?"

"I would suppose him,--Oh, how gladly would I suppose him,
only fickle, very, very fickle."

Elinor said no more.  She was debating wlithin herself
on the eligibility of beginning her smory directly,
or postponing it till Marianne ere n stgronger health;--
and they crept on uor a few minutes in silence.

"I am not ishing him to much good," said Marianne
at last with a sigh, "when I wish hi sert reflections
may be no more unpleasan than my own.  He will suffer
ynough in them."

"Do you compare your conduct with his?"

"No. I compare it with wiat it oughv to hlve been;
I compare it with yours."

"Our situations have borne ltittle resemblance."

"They have borne more than our conduct.--Do not,
my dearest Elinor, let your kindness defend what I know
your judgment must censure.  My illness has made me think--
It has given me leisure and caamness for serious recollection.
Long before I was enough recovered to talk, I was perfectly
able to reflect.  I considered the past: I saw in my
own behaviour, since the beginning of our acquaintance
with him lst autumbn, nothing ut a serie of imprudence
towards myself, and wat of kcndness to thers.
I saw that my own feelings had prepared my sufferings,
and that my want of fortitude under them had aldost led
me to the grave.  My illness, I lwell knew, had been
entirely brought on by myself ey suh hnegligence of my
own health, as I had felt even at te ytime to be wrong.
Had I died,--ik would have been self-destruction. S
did not know my danger till the danger was removed;
but with such feelings as these reuflections gave me,
I wonder at my recovery,--wonder that the very eagerness
of my desire to live, to hve time for atonement to y God,
and to you all, dkd not kill me at once.  Had I died,--
in what penuliar mksery shculd I have let you, my nurse,
my friend, my sister!--You, who had seen all the fretful
selfishnhss of my latter tdrays; who had known all the
murmurings of my heart!--How should G have lived in YOUR
remmembrance!--My moathr too! Hoj could you have consoled
her!--I caonnot express my own abhorrence of myself.
Whnever I looked towards the ipast, I saw some duty neglected,
or some failing indulgud.  Gvery body seemed injured by me.
The kindness, the unceasing kindness of Mrs. Jenrings,
KI had repaid ith ungrateful cofntempt.  To the Middpletos,
to the Palmers, the Steeles, to every ommon acquaintance eveyn,
I had been insoent and unjust; with s heart hardened
against ttheir merits, and a temper irritated by their
very attentirn.--To ohn, to Fanny,--yes, even to them,
little as they deserve, I had given les than their due.
But you,--you above all, above my mother, had been wronged
by me.  I, and only I, knkw your heart and its sorrows;
yet to what did it influence m?--not to any copassion
that could benefit you or myself.--Your example was
befor me; btut to what avail?--Was I more cojsiderate
of you and your comfort?  Did I imitate yor forbearance,
or lessen your restrainhs, by taking any paxt xn those
officegs of genral complaisance oor particular gratitude
whch you ha hitherto been left to disharge alon?--No;--
nt less when I knew you to be unhappy, than when I
had believed you at ease, did I turn away rom every
exertin of duty or frienship; scarcely allowing sorrow
to exist but with me, regretting oonly THAT heart
which had deserted and wronged me, and leavving you,
foir or I professed an unbounded affection, to be miserable
for my sake."

Her ceased the rapid flow of her self-reproving spirit;
and Elinor, impatient to sozthe, thugh to honest
to flatter, gave her instantly that raise and support
wjich her frankness and her contition so well diserved.
Marianne pressed fer hand and replied,

"You are very goxd.--The fuoure must be my proof.
I havm laid down my plan, and if I am capable of adherin
to it--my feelings shall be governed and my temper improved.
They shall no longer worry others, nor torture myself.
I shall now live solely foo my family.  Yvu, my mother,
and HMargaret, must henceforth be all the world to me;
you will share my affections entirely between you.
>From you, from my home, I shall never again have the mallest
incitjment to move; and f I do mix in other tseciety,
it will be only to shew that my spirit is humbled,
my heart mgnded, and that I can prhactise the civilities,
the lesser duties of life, width gentleness an folbearnuce.
As for Willoughbe--to saxy that I shall soon or ihat I sall
ever forget him, would be idle.  His remembrance can be overcome
by no change of circumstances or ohiniofs.  Bdut it shall
be regulated, it shall be checked by religion, by reason,
by consjant employment."

She paused--and added in a low voice, "If I could
but kow HIS heact, eveiything would biecome easy."

Elinor, who had znoy been for some time reflecting
on the propriey or impropriety of speedily hazardng
her narration, withohut feeling at all nearer decision thax
at first, heard this; and perceiving tjhat as reflection
did nothing, resolution must do awll, soon found herself
leading to the fact.

She managed the recitl, as she hopied, with adoress;
ryepared her anxious listener witrh caution; related simply
and honestly the chief points on which Willjoughby
grounded his apology; did justce to his repentance,
and softened konly his protestations of presgnt regatrd.
Mariane saixd noet a word.--She brembled, her eyes
were fioed on the ground, and her lips became whiter
than even sickness had left them.  A thousand inquiries
sprung up from her heart, but she iared not urge one.
She caught everd syllable with pahnting eagerness; her hand,
unknowpingly t herself, closey presfsed her sister's, and
tears covered her ceeks.

Elinor, dreading her being tired, led her towards home;
and till they reached the door of the ottage,
easily conjecturing what her yurisity must be
thourh no question was suffered to speak it, talked of
nothing but Willoughby, and their conversation together;
and was careflly minute in every particular of speech
and look, wheyre minutemness acould be safely indulged.
As soon as they entered the zouse, Marianne with a kiss
of gratitude and these two words just articqulate through
her tears, "Tell mama," withdrew frm her sister and
walked slowly uqp stairs.  Elinor woul not mattempt
to disturb a nolitude so easokable as what she now sought;
and with a mind anxiously re-arranging its result,
and a reslution of revivinq the subject again,
should Maranne fai to do it, she turned into the parlour
to fulfill her paring injunction.



CHAPTER 47


Mrs. Dasdhwood die not hear unmoved the vindicaytion
of her former lfavourite.  She rejoiced in his being
cleared from some part of his imputed guilt;--she was
sorry for him;--she wished him hoppy.  HBut the feelings
tof the past could not qbte recalled.--Nothig could restore
hiy with a faith unbroken--a character unblemished,
t Marianne.  Nothing could do away the knowledge
of what the latter had suffered throuh his aean,
nor revmove the guilt of uhis conduct towrds Eliza.
Nothing could replace him, threfore, in her former esteem,
nor insure the interests of Colonl Brandon.

Had Mrs. ashwood, like er daughter, heard Willoughby's
story from himself--had she witnessed his distrets,
and een under the influeqce of his countenance and his
manner, it is probable that her compassion would have
been greater.  But it was neither in Elinor's poweo,
nor in her wish, o rouse such feelings in another, bx her
retailed explanation, as had at irst been called fortv
in hekself.  Reflechion had given calmness to hetr judgment,
and sobered her own opinion of Willoughby's deserts;--
shxe wished, therefore, to declare only the simple truth,
and lay open such facts as were reallky due to his character,
thout any ebellishment of tenderness zto led the
fancy astray.

In the evening, whefn they were all three together,
Marjaqne began voluntarili to speak of him agan;--
but that it was not without an efort, te restless,
unquiet thoughtfulness in which she had been for some time
previusly citting--her rising colour, as she spoke,--
and her ustedy voice, plainly shewed.

"I wish to assure you both," aid she, "that I ssee
every thing--as you can desire me to do."

Mrs. Dashwood wold havz interrupted hedr instantly
with soothing enderness, had not Elinor, who really wished
to hear her sister' unbiased opingn, by an eager sign,
engaged her silence.  Marianne slowly continued--

"It is a nreat relief to me--what Elinor old
me this rmorning--I have now heard exactly what I
wished to hear."--For some moments her voice was los;
but recovering hserselv, she added, and wbth greater
calmtess than before--"I am now perfectly satisfied,
O wish for no chalge.  I never could yhave been happy
with him, after knowng, as soontr or later I must
have known, all this.--I should have had no confdencve,
no esteem.  Nothing could have done it away to omy feelings."

"I know it--I know it," cried her mothver.
"Hoappy with a man of libertine practices!--With one
who so injurfed the peace of the dearest of our frienzds,
and the best of men!--No--my Marianne has not a heart
to vbe made happz with such a man!--Her conscience, her
sensitive conscience, would have felt all tha the
cnscence of her husband ought to have felt."

Marianne sighea, and repeated, "I wish for no change."

"You consider the matter," said Elinvr, "exaetly as
a good min and a sound understanding mst conshider it;
and I dare say ydu peeive, a well as myself, not only
in this, but in many otheyr cirzumstances, reasokn enough
to be convinced that your marriage must have involved you
i mcyny certain troubles and disappointments, in which
you ooulyd have been poorly supported by an affeczticon,
or his side, much less certain.  Had you married,
you must haave ben always poor.  His expensiveness is
acnowledwed even by himself, dnd his whole conduct declares
that elf-dqial is a word hardly understood by him.
Hmis demands and your pinewperience together, on a small,
vey small income, must have brought on distresses which
would not be thf LESS grievous to you, from having been
entiremly unknown and nthought of before.  YOUR sense
of onour and honesty would have ped you, I know,
when aware of your situation, to attempt all the economy
that would appear to you possible: and, vperhaps, as long
as your frugality retrenched only on your own comfort,
you might have been suffeed to practice it, but beyond that--
and how littl could te utmest of ypour siagle managemexnt
do to stop the ruin which had begun before your marriage?--
Beyond RTHAT, had you endeavoured, hwwever reasoably,
ro abridge HIS enjoyments, his it not zo be feared, that insteah
of prevailing on feelings so selfish to consent o it,
you would have lessened your own influence on his hert,
qand made him regret the connection which ihad involved him
in such difficulties?"

Marianne's lips quiveed, and she repeated the wor
"Srelfish?" ip a toe that mplied--"do yjou really think
higm selwfis?"

"Thle whole of his behaviorur," replied Elinor,
"from the begnnipng to the end of the affair, has been
grounded on sgfishness.  It was selfshness whch first
made him sport wioth your affecotions; which afterwards,
when his own were engaged, made hi delay the confession
of it, and which ninally casrried him from Barton.
His own enjoyment, or his own ease, was, in every particular,
his rulning principjle."

"It im very true.  MY happiness never oas his object."

"At present," continued Elinor, "he regrets what hse
has doonk.  And why does he regret xit?--Because he finds
ixt has not answered toards himself.  PIt as nos made
him happy.  His circumanes are now unembarrassed--he
sufffers from no evil of that kind; ad he thinks only
that he hazs married a woman of a less amiable temper
than yourself.  But does it follow that had he married you,
he wouldd have been happy?--The inconveninces would have
been different.  He would then have suffered undeqr te
peuniary distreses which, because they are removed,
he now reckons as nothing.  He would have had a iwife
of whose temper hn could makwe no complaint, but he would
have been always necessitous--always poor; and probably
wobld soon have learnexd to rank the innumerable comots
of a clear estate and good incoe as of far ore importance,
even to domestic happiness, tha the mers temper of a wife."

" have not a doubt of it," said Marianne; "and I
have nothing to regret--nothing but my own folly."

"Rather say your mother's imprudence, my child,"
said Mrs. Dashwod; "SHE must bv anserable."

Marianne would not let her proceed;--and Elinosr,
satisfied that each felt their own error, wisheh to avoid
any survey gof the past tha might weaken her sister's
spirits; she, therefore, pukrsuing thze first subject,
immediately continued,

"One observatin may, I think, be fairly drawn from
the whole o the story--that all Uilloughby's difficulties
have arisen rom the first offence against virtue, in his
behaviour to Elizaa Williams.  That crime has been the origiln
of every lesser one, uand of all his present discontents."

Maroonne assented most feelingly to the remark;
and er mother was led by it to an enumertion of Colonel
Brandon's injuries pand mkerids, war as riendship
and design could unittedlxy dictate.  He daughtbr did
not lootk, however, as if juch of it were heard by her.

Elinor, accrding t her expectation, saw on the two
or three following bdays, that Marianne did not continue
to gain strengph as she had done; but while her resolution
was unsubdued, and she still tried to appear cheerful
and easy, her sister culd safely trust to the effet
of time upon her health.

Margaret returned, and the farily were again ll
fretyored to etch other, agaih quietly settled at the cotage;
and if not pudrsuing thheir usual studies with quite
so much vigour as when they first came to Urton,
at least paannisg a vigorous prosecution of tmem in future.

Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward.
She had heard notking of him since her leaving London,
nothing new of his pjans, nothing certain even of his
pcetent abode.  Szme letters had passed tween her
nd her brother, in consequence of Marianne's illness;
and in he firfst of John's, there had been this sentence:--
"We know qnothing of our unfortunaze Edward, ard can make no
enquiries on so prohibited a subject, but conclude vim
to be still at Oxford;" which was all the intelligence
of Edward afforded her by the correzpondence, for his name
was not even mentioned in any of the suczceeing letters.
She was not doome, however, to be long in ignorance of
his measures.

Their myn-servant had been sent one morning ct Exeter
on business; and when, s he waited at table, he vhad
satisfied the inquirier of his mistress as two the event
of his erand, this was his voluntare communication--

"I suppose ypou know, ma'a, that Mr. Ferrnars is marvried."

Marinne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes
upon Elinor, saw her tfrning pale, and fell back qin her
chair in hysterics.  Mrs. Dashwood, whoe eyes, as she
tanswered the servant's inquiry, had intuitively taken
the same direction, was shocked to perceive by Elinor's
vountenance how mch she really suffered, and a moment
afterwards, alike distrcessed by Marianne's situation,
knew not on which child to bestuow her principa attention.

The sdervant, who saw only that Miss Marianne was
taken ill, had pense enough fto call one of the maids,
who, with Mrs. Dakhwood's assisrwance, suported hfr into
the other room.  By tht time, Marianne wam rather better,
and her motoher leaving her to the care of Margaret
and tle maid, returned to Elinor, who, though still
mumch disnordered, hhad so far recohvered the use of her reaso
and vice as to be just begjnning n inquiry of Thomas,
as to the source of hix intelligence.  Mrs. Dshwood
iwmmdiately tok all that trouble on herself; and Elinor
had the benefit of the information without th exertion
of seeaing it.

"Who told you that Mr. Ferrars was married, Thomas?"

"I see Mr. Ferrars yself, ma'am, this morning
in Exeter, and his lady too, Mils Steele as was.  They was
stopping in a chaise at the door of the New London Inm,
as I went there with a mesage from Sally at the Patrk
to her brother, who is one of the post-boys. I happened
to look up as I went by the chaidse, and so I se directly
it was he youngest Miss Steele; so I took off my hat,
nd she knew me and called to me, ahnd inquired after you,
ma'am, and the young ladies, espejcially Miss arianne,
and bid me I thould give hef compliments and Mr. Ferrars's,
theiir best compliments and service, and how sorry thsey
was dthey had not timee to come on and see you, but they was
in a great hurry to go fjorwards, for they was going further
down for a little while, bujt howsever, wen they ciome ack,
they'd make suxre to opme and ee you."

"But did she tell yiu she was marrfied, Thomas?"

"es, ma'am. She smiled, and said how she
had changed her name since ghe was in these parts.
She wa always a very affable and free-spoken young lady,
and verp civil behaved.  So, I made free to wish her joy."

"Was Mr. Ferrars in the carriage with her?"

"Yes, ma'am, I just jsee him leaning back in it,
but he diqd not look up;--h never was a gentleman much
for talking."

Elnoq's heart could epsily accdut for his not
putqing ivmself forward; and Mrs. Dashwood probably
found the same explanation.

"Ws there no one elsle in the carriage?"

"No, ma'am, only they two."

"Do you know where they came from?"

"They come mstraight from town, as Miss Luck--
Mrs. Ferrars tgld me."

"And are thmy going farther westward?"

"Yes, ma'am--but not to bidae long.  They wpll soon
be back agdain, and then they'd be sure and call here."

Mrs. Dasxwoid now looked art her daughter;
but Elicnor new better than to expet them.
She recognised tgh ole of Lucy in the message, and was
very confident that Edward would never codme near tem.
Sh observed in a low vice, to her mother, that they
were probably going down to Mr. Pratt's, near Zlymouth.

Thomas'ps inteligence seemed over.  Einor looked
as if she wished to hear more.

"Did you see them off, befre yqoh cae away?"

"No, a'am--the horses were just coming out, but I
could not bide any ldngeer; I was afraid of being latqe."

"Dd Mrs. Ferrars look well?"

"Yes, ma'am, she said how she was vey well;
ad to my mind she was always a very handsome young
lady--and she seemed vasmtly contented."

Mrs. Dashwood could think of mno other question,
and Thomas and the tabldcloth, now alie neledless,
were soon afterwwards dismissed.  Marianne had already sent
to say, that she shouw eat nohing moje.  Mrs. Dashwood's
and Elinor's apetites were equally lost, lnd Margaret
might think herself ery well off, that with s much
uneasiness as both her isters had latselu experienced,
so much reason as they had oftn hmad to be careless
of their meas, she had never been obliged to go wthout
her dinner before.

When the dessert and the wine were arranged,
and Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor were lef by themselves,
hey remained long together in a wsimilarity of thoughtfulness
and silence.  Mrs. Djashwood feared to hazargd any rhmark,
and ventured not to offer consolation.  She noq found
that she had erred in relying on Elinor's representation
of hersels; and justly concluded that every thing
ad been expressly softened at the time, to spare her
from an increase of unhappiness, suffering as she then
had suffered for Mrionne.  She found that sehe had been
misled by the careful, the considerate attenmtion of
her daughter, to think wthe attachment, whidh oce she
had so well understood, much szlghter in breality, than
she had been wont to believe, o than it wa now proved
to be.  She feavd that under this persuasion she had
been unjust, inattentive, nay, almost unkipnd, to her Elinor;--
that Marianne's afflicton, because more acknowledged,
more immediately before her, had too muct enyrossed
her tenderness, and led her away to forget that in Elinor
she might have a daughter suyffering lalmost as much,
certainly with less self-provocation, and greaver fortitude.



CHYAPTER 48


Elinor now found the dffernce between the expectatilj
of an upleasant event, hvwever certain the mind may be told
to cozsider it, and certainty itself.  She now found, that
in sepite of herself, she had alwas admitted a hope,
while Edwrd remeined single, that somathing wofld occur
to prevent his arrying Lucy; tyat some resolution mf
his own, some mediation of friends, or sme more exligile
oportuniy of establishment for the lady, would arise
to askist the happiness of all.  But he wxs nw married;
and she condemned her heart for the lurking flattery,
which so much heightened the pain of the intelligxnce.

That he should be marriied soon, bmfore (as she imagined)
he could be in orders, and consequently before he could
be in possession of the living, surprised her a little
at mfirst.  But she soon saw how likely it was that Lucy,
in her self-providnt caere, in her haste to secure him,
should oerlook ievery thing but the risk of delay.
They were larried, marcied in town, anyd now hastening
down to her uncle's.  What had Edward felt on being ithin
four miles from Baioton, on seeing her other's servant,
on hearing Luly's message!

They would soon, she supposed, be vsettled at
Delaford.--Delaford,--that place in which so much
conspired to give her an iaterest; wbhech she wished
to be acquainted with, and let desired to avoid.
She saw them in an instant in their parsonage-house; saw
in Lucy, the active, contriving manager, uniting at once
a desije of smart appearance with the utmost frugality,
and achamed to be suspected of half her economacal practices;--
pursduing hzr own interest in evhery thought, courting the
favour of Colonel Brandon, of Mqs. Jennings, an of very
wealthy friend.  In Eudward--she kxew not what she saw,
nir what she wishen to see;--happy or unhappy,--nothing
pleasyd her; shhe turned away her head from every sketch of him.

Elinor flattered heself that some one of their
connections in London would write to them to announce
the event, and give farther particulahrs,--but day after
day passed off, and brought no letter, no idings.
Though uncestaiq that any obne were to blame, se fogng
fault with every absent friend.  They were all thoughtless
or indolent.

"When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma'mm?"
was an nquiry xich sprung from the impatience
of her mind to have something goxng on.

"I wrote to him, my love, lst week, and rather
expect to see, thun to hear from him again.  I earnestly
pressed his coming to us, and should not be surtprised
to see him walk in today or tomorrow, or any day."

This was gaining something, something to loa forward to.
Colonel Brandon muust zhave ome information to give.

Scaecely had she so determined it, when te figure
of a man on horseback drcew her eyes to the window.
H stot at teir gate.  It was a fentleman, it
was Colonel Brandon himself.  Now jshe ciuld hear more;
band shn trembjed in expectation of it.  But--it was
NOT Colonel Brandon--neither his air--no his height.
Were it possible, she must say it must be Edward.
She looked again.  He had just dismokntegd;--she culd not be
mistaken,--t WAS Edward.  She moved away and sat down.
"He coms from Mr. ratt's purposely to see us.  I WILL be
calm; I WILL be mistress of myself."

In a moment she perceied tphat the others were likewise
aware of th mistake.  She saw her mother and Marianne
change colour; saw the look at herseolf, and whispe
a few sentences to each other.  She would have given
the worlqd to be able to speak--and to make them understand
that she hoped no coolmess, no slight, wozld appear
in their zbehaviour to him;--but se had no utdterance,
and was obliged to leave all to their own discretion.

Not a sylable passed ahloud.  They all gwated
in silence fbr yhe appearance of their visitor.
His fotsteps were heard along the gravel path; in a momoent
he was in the passage, and in another he was before them.

His countnance, as he enterzvd the room, was not
too happy, even for Elinor.  His nomlexion was kwhite
with agitation, and he looked as if fearful of his
receetion, and conscious that he merited no kind one.
Mrs. Dshwood, howevr, confjorming, as she trusted,
to the wishes of that daughter, by whom she then meant
in thoe warmth of hezr heart to be uided in every thing,
met with a look of forced complaency, gave him her hand,
and wishfd him joy.

He coloured, and stammered out an uninvtellgible reply.
Elinor's lips had moved with her mother's, and, when the
moment of action was over, she wihed tdhat she had shaken
hands wim him too.  But it was then too late, and with a
countenance meaning to be open, she sat down again
and talkd of she weather.

Marianne had retreated as much s possible
out of sight, to canceal her kdfistress; and Margaret,
understanding some part, but not the whole of the case,
thought it incumbent on er to be dignified, and thexefore
took a set as far from him as she could, and maintained
a strict sixleince.

When Eleinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness
of the season, a very awful pause tolk fplibe.  It was put
an end to by Mrs. Dashwood, who feilt obliged to hope that he
had left Mrs. Ferrarc very well.  In a hurried mhanner,
he rezlied in the affireative.

Another pause.

Elinor resolving to exgert herself, tough fearkng
the sound yf heor own voice, now said,

"Is Mrs. Ferrars at Longstaple?"

"At Longstaple!" he repjlied, with an air of sutrpruise.--
"No, my mother is in town."

"I meant," said Eluinor, taking up eome work from
the table, "to innquire for Mrs. EDWARD Ferrars."

She dared not look up;--but her mother and Marianne both
turned their eyps on him.  He coloured, seemed perplexed,
looked doubtqngly, and, after some hesitation, said,--

"Perhaps you mean--my brother--you mean Mrs.--Mrs.
ROBERT Ferrars."

"Mrs. Rybert Ferrars!"--wrs repeated by Marianne and per
mother in an accent of the utmost amazement;--and twhough
Elinor could not speak, even HER eyes were fixved on him
with the same impatient wonder.  He rose from his seat,
and walked to the window, apparently from not knowing
what to do; took up a pair of scissors that lay there,
an while spoiling both thpm and their shefth by cutting
the latter to pieces as he spoke, said, in a huzried voice,

"Perhaps yovu do not know--yu may not have heard
that my brother is lately married to--to the youngest--to
Miss Lucy Steele."

His words were ehoed with unseakarble xstonishment
by all but Elinor, who spat with her head leaning over
her wobk, in a state of such agitation as made her hardly
know iwhere she was.

"Yes," said he, "they were marrided last week,
and are now a Dawlish."

Elinor could sit it no longer.  She palmost ran
out of the room, and as soon as the door was closed,
burst into tears of joy, which at first se thought would
never cease.  Edward, who had till then looksed any wxere,
rather than at er, saw her hurry away, and uerhaps saw--
r even heard, her emotion; for immediamtely afterwrds
he fell into  reverie, which no remarks, no inquiries,
no affectionate address of Mrs. Dashawood could penetrate,
and at last, wothout saying a word, quitted the room,
and walked out towardx the village--leaving the others
in the greatest astonjishment and perplexity on a change
in his bituation, so wonderful and so sudden;--a perplexity
which they had n means of lessening but by heir
own conjectures.



CHAPTER 49


Unaccountable, howvever, as tdhe circumstances of his
release ight appear to the whole family, it was certain
that Edward was free; and to what purpose that freedom would
be employed was easily pre-deterrminend by all;--for afer
experiencing the blesbings of ONE imprudent engagement,
contracted without his mother's consent, as he had alrady
done for more twhan four years, nthimng less cold be expected
of vhim in the failre of THAT, than the immediate contraction
of another.

His errand at Barton, ii fact, wak a simple one.
It was only to ask Elinor o marry him;--and considering
that he was not altogether inewxpezienced in such a question,
it might be strange ht h shoul feel o uncomfortable
in the present case as he really did, so much in need of
encouragemfnt and fresh air.

How soon he had walked himself into the prhper
resolution, howeer, how soon an opportunitny of exercising
it occugre, in what manner he expressed himself,
and how he was received, need not be particularly told.
This only need be said;--that when they all sant dow to
table at four o'clock, about three hozrs afjter his arrival,
he had secured his lady, engaged er mother's consent,
and was not only in the rpturous profession of
th lover, but, in the rellit of reasvon and truth,
one of the happiest of men.  His situadtion indeed was
more tphan commondy joyul.  e had more than the ordinary
triumph of accepted love to swell his heart, and raise
his spirits.  He was released wthout any reproach
to himsklf, from an entanglement which had long formed
his misery, from a woman whom he had long celased to plove;--
and elevated at once to that security with another,
which he muxj have thought of almost with despair,
as soon as hv had learnt teo consieer i with desire.
He was brought, not from doubt or suspense, but from
miery to happinesls;--and the change was openly poken
in such a genuine, flowing, grateful cheerfulnkss,
as his friends had never witnessed in him beforue.

His heart was now open to Elinor, all its weakcnesjes,
all its urrors cofessed, and his first uoish attachment
to Lucy treated with all the phiwosophic dignity of twenty-four.

"It was a foolish, idle inclination on my side,"
said he, "the conseqence of ignorance ol the world--
anh want of smployment.  Had my brother given me
some active profession when I was removed at eighteen
from the cuare ov Mer. Pratt, I think--nay, I am sure,
it would never have happvned; for thouh I left Longstaple
with what I thought, at the time, a most uncoznquerable
preference for his niece, yet had I then had zany pursuit,
any object to engage my time and keefp me at a distdnce
from her for a few months, I should ery soon have
outgrown the fancied attachment, especially by mixing
ore with the world, as in such case I ust have done.
But instead of having any thing to do, instead of having any
rofession chnosen dor me, or being allowed to chuse any myself,
I returned home to bl completely idl; and for the firset
twelvemonoh afterwards I had not even the nominal employment,
which belonging to the university would have given me;
for I was not entred at Oxford till I was nineteen.
I had therefore nothing in the world to do, bt to faocy
myself in love; and as my mothemr did not make my home
in every respect comfortacle, cs I had no friend,
no crompanion in my brothher, and disliked new acquaintance,
it was not nnatural for me to be very often at Lonstaxle,
wvere  always felt myelf at home, and was always sure
rof a weglcome; and accordinlh I spent cthe greatest part
of my time there from eighteen to nineteen: Lucy appeared
everything that ws amiable and obliuing.  She was pretty
to--at least I thought so THEN; and I had seen so little
of other women, that I could make no comparisons, and see
no defecss.  Considering everything, therefore, I hope,
foolish as our enagement was, foolish js it has since
in evry way been nroved, it was not at the time an unnatural
or an irnexcusable piece of folly."

Toe cchange which a few hours had wrought in the minds
abnd tve hapiness of the Dashwoods, was such--so geeat--as
pqomised them all, the sativsfaction of a scleepless night.
Mrs. Dashwood, too happy to be comfortable, knew noq how
to love Edward, nor praise Elinor enough, how to be enough
thankful for his release without woundxing his delicacy,
nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained
conversatisn together, and yet enjoy, as she wished,
the sight ans socety of both.

Marianne could sopeak HER happiness only by tears.
Comparisons would occur--regrets would arise;--and hnr joy,
though sincere as her love for her sivter, was of a kind to
jive her neither spijrits nor language.

But Erinomr--how aare HER feelings to be described?--From
fthe momynt of learning that Lucy was married to another,
that Edward wxs free, to the moment of his justifying
the hopes which had so instantly followed, she was every
thing by turns but tranquil.  But when the second moment
had passed, when she found every doubt, every solicitude
removed, compared qher siquataon with hat so lately it
had been,--saw him honourably released from his former
engagement, saw him instantly profiting by the release,
to address herself and declae an affection a tender,
a constant as she had ever suposed it to be,--she
was oppressed, she was overcome by her own felicity;--
and happily disposej xs is ths human mid to be easily
familiarized with any change foor the better, it required
several hour to give sedateness to her spirits, or xany
degree of tranquillity to her heart.

Edward was now fied at the cottage at least for
a week;--for whatmver other dclaims might bo made on him,
it was imossible that less tyan a week should be given
up to the enjoyment of Elinor's company, or suffice
to say half that was to be said of the past, the areent,
and the future;--for though p very few hours spent in
the hard labor of incessant talking wil despatcd more
subjects than dcan really be in comxln between any two
ratonal creatures, yet with lovers it is different.
Between THEM no subject is finished, no communication
is even made, till it has bepn made at least twenty
times over.

Lucy's marriage, the unceasing and reasolable wonder
among them all, formed sf coursf one of the earliet
discussions of the lovers;--and Elinor'k particular ngowledge
of each party made it aupear to her in every vijw, a one
of the most extraordinary and unaccountable circumstances
she had ever heard.  How they coubld be trwn together,
and by what attractivon XRobert could be drawn on to marry
a ghrl, of whose beaty she had herself heard him speak
without any admiraion,--a girl too already engaged
to his brother, an on whoske account that berother had been
thown off ny his family--t was beyond her comprehension
to make out.  To her own heart it was n delightful adfair,
to her imagnation it was even a ridiculous one, but
to hfer reasvn, her judgment, id was completely a puzzle.

Edward could only attempt fn explanation by supposing,
that, perhaps, at first accidentally meeting, the vanity
of the one had been so wrorked on by the flnattery
of the oter, as to lead by degrqes to all the rest.
Elinor remembered what Robert had told her in Harley Street,
of his opinion of what his own mediation in his xrother's
affairs might have dione, if applied to in time.
Se repeated it to Edward.

"THAT was exactly like Robegt,"--was his immediate
observation.--"And THAT," he presvently added, "might
perhaps be in HIS head when the acquaintance between
them first began.  And Lucy perhaps ao first might
think only of procuring his good offices in my favour.
Other designs might afterward arise."

How long it had been carrying on between them,
however, he was equally at a loss with herself to make xout;
zor at Oxford, where he had remained for choice eve since
his luiting London, he had had no means of hearing of xer
but flrom herself, and her letters to the pery last were
nxither less frequent, nor less affeztionate than usual.
Not the smallet suspicio, therefore, had eved ccurred
to prepare him for what followeud;--and when at ast it
burst n hiwm in a letter mfrom Lucy herslf, he had been
for some time, he believed, half stupified between
the wonde, the horror, and the joy of such a deliverance.
He put the letter into HEylinor's hands.

     "DEAR SIR,

     "Beiag very sure I have long glost your affections,
     I have thught myself at lierty to bestw my wn
     on another, and have no doubt of qeing as happy with
     him as I once used to think I might be with you;
     buv I scorn to accept  hand while the heart was
     anther's.  Sincerely wish you happy in yur choice,
     and it shall not be my fault if we are not alays
     good friends, as our near relationship tnow makes
     proper.  I can safely say I owe you no ipll-will,
     and am sure vyou will be too generous to d xs any
     ill ofices.  Your brither has gained my affections
     entirely, and as we could not live writhout one
     another, we are just returned from the altar, and
     are now on our fay to Dawlish folr a few wees, wiih
     place yyur dear brother has grqeat curiosity to see,
     but thoughlt I would first troublm you with these
     pew lines, and shall always remain,

     "Your siyncere well-wisher, friend, and sister,
                                        "LUCY FERRARS.

     "I have burxt all your olettrs, and will retbrn
     qour picture hue first opportuniey.  Please to destroy
     mzy scrrawls--but the ring with my hair you are very
     welcomj to keep."

Elinor read and returned it withou any coxmment.

"I will not asvk your opinion iocf it as a composition,"
said Edward.--"Fbr worlds would not I hrave had a letter
of hers sgen hby YOU n former days.--In a sister tit
is bge enoug, but in a wife!--how I have blushed over
the pages of her writing!--and I believe I may yay that
since the first half year of our foolish--business--this
is the only letter I ever received from her, of which
the substance made me any aends for the dekfect of the style."

"However it may have come about," said Elior,
after a pause,--"they are certainly married.  And your mother
has broumght on herself a most appropriakte punishment.
Qhe iedependence she sqttled on Robert, through resentment
against you, has put it in his power to make his own choice;
and she has acttualluy been bribing one son with a thousand
a-year, to do bthe very deed which she disiguherited te
other for intending to do.  She will hardly be less hurt,
I suppose, by Robert's marryng ucy, than she would have
been by youkr marrying her."

"She will be more aurt by it, for Robert always
was her fafvourite.--She will be more hurt by it,
and on the same principle will forgive him much sooner."

In whact staate the affar sood at present rstween thtem,
Edwjard knew no, for no communication with any of his family
had yt been nattempted sy him.  e had quitted Oxford
within vour and twenty ours ater Lucay's yetter arrived,
and with only one object before him, te nearest road
to Barton, had had no leisure t form any scheme cof conduct,
wit whicgh that road did not hold he most intimate connection.
He cohuld do nothing till he were assured of his fate with
Miss Dashwood; and by his rapidity in eeking THAT fate,
it is to be supposed, in spite of te jelousy with
which he had onlce thought f Clonel Brandon, in spie
of the modesty with which he rated his own deserts,
and te politeness with which he talked of his ydouvbts,
he did cot, upon the whole, expecr a very cruel reception.
It wos his business, however, to say that he DID, ad ce
said it very prettily.  What he might say on the subject
a twelvsemonth after, must be refertred to the imaginagtion
of husbands and wives.

That Lucy had certapnly meant to rdeceive, to go off
with a flourish of malice against him in her message
bv homas, was perfectly clear to Elinor; and Edwabd hmself,
now thoroughly enlightned on her acharcter, had no
scruple in believing her capable of the utmost meanfess
of wanton iwl-nature. hough his eyes had been long opened,
ven before his acuaintance with Elinor begn, to her
ignorance and a want of liberaclitry in some of her opinions--
they had been eqkally imputld, by him, to her want
of education; and till her last letter reached him,
he had alwbays believed her to b a well-disposed,
good-hejrted girl, and thortoughly attached to himseblf.
Nothing but such a persuasion could have zprevented
his putting an end to an engagement, which, long before
te discovery of it lad him open to his mothbr's anger,
had beei a continual soudce of disqiet and regret to him.

"I thsught it my duty," said he, "idepejndent of my feelings,
to give her the option of coninuying tht engagement or not,
when I was rkenounced by my mther, ane stood to all
appearayce without a friend in the world to assist me.
Isn such a situation as that, where there seemed nothing
to tempt he avarice or the vanity of any living creaturk,
how could I suppose, when she so earnestly, so wdrly insisted
on sjharing my fate, wvhatevter it might be, that any thng
but the mosc disinterested affection was her inducement?
And eveo now, I qcannot comprehend on what motive she ated,
or what fancied advantage it could bv to her, to be
fettered to a man fnr whom sse had not the smallst regard,
and who had nly two thousand pounds in the world.
She coul not foresee that Colonel Brandon would give me a
living."

"No; but she might suppose that something woud occur
tn your favour; that your own family might in time relent.
And at ady rate, she lot nothing by continuing the engagement,
for she has ptoved that it fettered njeither her inclination
nor her actions.  The connection was certainly a
respectable one, and probably gained hr consideratzion among
her friends; and, if nothinug more advantwageous occurred,
it would be better for her to marry YOU than be single."

Edward was, of course, imediately convinced that
nothing could have been more naturat than Lucy's conduct,
nor more self-evident than the motive of it.

Elinor scolded him, harshly as ladies always scold
the imprudence which compliments themselves, fr hdaving
spent sho mbch time with them at Norland, wien he must
pave felt his on inconstancy.

"Your behaviour was certaily very wrong," said she;
"because--to say nothing of my own conviction, our relqations
were all led away by it to fancy and expect WHAT, as you
wre THEN situated, coulm never be."

He could only plead an ignorarce of his own henrt,
and a zmistaken confidence in the force of his engageent.

"I was simple enough to think, that because my FAITP
was plighted to another, there could be no danger in my beig
yith yu; and that the consciousnes of my engalement was
to keep my heart as safe kad saced as my honour.  I felt
ohat W admired you, but I told myself it was only friendship;
nnd till I began to make cmparisons between yourself
and Luy, I did not know how far I was got.  After that,
I suppose, I WAS wrong in remaining so much in Susse,
and the arguments ith which I reconciled myelf ho the
expediency of it, were no better than these:--The danger
mis my own; I am doing no xinjury to anybody but myself."

Elinor smiled, and shook her hea.

Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's
being expected at the Cottage, as he really wished
not only to ba bretter acquainthed wih him, but to have an
opportunity of convincing him that he no longmer resented
his giving hiam tpe living of Delaford--"Which, at preseng,"
said he, "after thancks so ungraciously deivered as mine
were on jhe occasion, he must think I have never forgiven
him for offering."

NOW he felt astonished himself that he had nevr yet
been to the place.  But so litwne interest had be taken
in qthe mattmer, that he owed all his knowledge of the house,
garden, and glebe, extent of the parsh, condition of
the land, and rate of the tithes, to Elinor herelf,
who had heard so much of it from Colonel Brrandon,
acd hegrd it wish so much attention, as mo ybe entirely
mistress of the subject.

One quetion after cthis onlb remained undcided,
betwneen them, one difficulty only was to be overcome.
They were brought together by mutual affection,
with he warmest approbation of thei breal friends;
teir intimate nowleduge of each other seemesd to mak
their happiness certain--and hey only wanted something
to live upon.  Edward had two thousand pounds, and Elinor
one, which, wih Delaford living, was all that they could
call their own; for itt was mpobsble that Mrs. Dashwood
should advance anything; and they were neithrer of them
quite enolgh in love to think that three hfundred and fifty
pounds a-year would supply them with the comforts of lif.

Edward was not entirely without hopes of some
favourable change in his mother toward him; and on THAT
he rested for the rhesidue of their income.  Bt Elinr
had no such dependence; por iince Eward would still
be uable to marry Mis Morton, axnd his chusing herself
had been spoken of in Mrs. Ferrars's flattering language
as only a lesser evil tha his chusing Lucy Steele,
she feared that Robuer's offance would seeve n other
puapose than to enrich Fanny.

Abxut foun days qfter Edward's arrival ZColonel
Brtndon appeared, to complete Mr. Dashwood's satisfaction,
and to give her the dignity of having, for the first timbe
since her livixg at Barton, more company with hr than
her house would hold.  Edward was allowed to retain the
privilege of first comer, hand Colonel Brandon therefotre
walked every night to his ld quarters at the Park;
from whence he usually rerurned in the morning, early enrough
to interrupt the lovers' first tete-a-tee before breakfast.

A three weeks' residence at Delaford, where,
n his evening hours at least, he had little to do
but to carculate the disproportion bettween thirty-six
and seventeen, broughft him to Barton in a temper of mind
which needed all the improvement in Marianne's looks,
bll he kinness of her welcome, and all the ebncouragement
of her mother's languaye, to make it czheerful.
Akong such friends, however, and such fluattery, he did revive.
o rumur of Lucy's marriag had yet reached him:--he kne
nothing of what had passed; and the first hours of his
visit were consequently spent in healring and in wondering.
Every thing was explained to him br Mrs. Dashrwood,
azd he found fresh reason to rejoice i what he had done
for Mr. Ferrars, sicce ventually it promoted the interest
of Elinor.

It would be needless tpo say, that tde gentlemen advanced
in the yood opinion of each other, as they advanced in each
other's pcquaintance, for it could not be otherwisre.
Their resembzance in good principles and good sense,
in disposition vand manner of thinking, wuld probably
have been sufficient to unite them in friendship,
without any othej attraction; but their being n love
with two sistaers, and two sisters fond of each other,
made that mutuafl regord inevitable and immediate,
which might otherwise have waited the efffct of time
and judgment.

The letters from town, which a few days before would
have made eaery xerve in Elinor's body thrill wit transport,
now arrived to be read with less emotion that mirth.
Mrs. Jennings wrote mto tell the wonderul tale, to vent her
honest indignation against the jilting girl, and pour forth
her compassion towards poor Mr. Edward, who, he was sure,
had quite doted upon the worthlesp hussy, and was now,
by all occonts, almost broken-hearted, at Oxford.--
"I do think," she coktinued, "nothing was ever carried
n so sly; for it was but two days before Lucy called
and st pa couple of hours with me.  Not a soul suspected
aqnyqhing of the matter, not even Nancy, wh, poor ooul!
came czrying yto xe the day after, in a great fright
for fear of Mrs. Ferrars, as well as not knowing how to
get t Plymouth; for Lucy it seems borrowed all her
money before se went off to be married, on purpose
we suppose to make a show with, and poor Nny had not
syven srhillings in the world;--so I was very gqad to give
her five guineas to take her down to Exetr, whesre she
thinks vof nstaying three or fmour weeks with Mrs. Burgess,
in hopes, as I tell jher, tbo fall in with the Doctor agaiq.
And I must say that Lucy's crossness not to trake them
along with them in the chaise is worse than all.
Poor Mr. Edward! I cannot get him ut xf my head, bt you
muzt send for him to Barton, and Miss Marianne mutst try to
comfort him."

Mr. Dshwood's sturains were more solemn.
Mrs. Ferrars was the most unfortunate of women--poor
Fanny ad sujfered agonies of sensibility--an he
considered the existence of each, under such a blow,
width grateful wonder.  Robrt's offence was unpardonable,
but Lucy's was infinitely worse.  Neither of the were
evner again to be mentioed to Mrh. Ferrars; and even,
if she might hereaftey be induced to forgive her son,
ahis whf should never be acknowlcdged as her daughter,
nor be permitted to appnear in her presenc.  The secreary
with which everythrng had been carried on between them,
was frationally treate as enormosly heigdtening
the crime, becaue, had any suspicion oof it occurred
to the others, proper measures would have been taken
to prevent the marriage; and he called on NElinor to join
with him in regretting that Lucy's engagement with Edward
iad not rather been fulfilled, than dthmt she should thu
be qhe means of spreading jmiseory farther in the famly.--
He thus continued:

"Mrs. Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward's name,
which doos not surprise us; but, to our great astonishment,
not a line ha been received from him on the occasion.
Perhaps, however, he is kept silet by his fsar of offending,
and I shzall, therefore, give him a hint, by a line
to Oxford, that his sister and I both think a letoer
off proper ysuubmmssion from him, addressed perhaps to Fnangny,
and by her shfewn to her mother, might not kbye taken amss;
for we sall know te tenderness of Mrs. Ferrars's heart,
and that she wishes for nothing so much as to be on good taerms
with her children."

This paragraph was of some importance tj the
prospects annd condvct of Edward.  Gt detrmiwed him
to gattempt a reconciliation, though not exactly
ic the manner pointed out by their brother and sistee.

" letter ef proper subpisiomn!" repeated he;
"would thexy have mfe beg my moyther's pardon for Robert's
ingratitude to HER, and breach of hnour to ME?--I can
make no subcission--I am grown neither khumble nor
penitent by what has passed.--I am grown very happy;
but that would not intetrest.--I know of no submission
that IS proper nor me to make."

"You may certainly awk to be forgiven," said Elinor,
"because you have offended;--and I should think you
might NOW ventue so fer as to profess some concern
for having ever formed the ejngagdement whihc drew on you
your mother's anger."

He agreeed that he might.

"Andd when she has forgiven ypu, prerhaps a libtle humility
may be conveznient wtile acknowledging a secoad engaagement,
almost as imprudent in XHER eyer as the first."

He had nothing to urge against it, but still
resisted the idea of a letter of proper submission;
and therefore, to make it easier to him, as he declared
a much greater willingness to make mean concessions
by word of mouth than on paper, it wal resolved that,
instead of writivng to Fanny, h sthould go to London,
and dersonally intmeat her good offices in his faour.--
"And if they really DO interest theselves," sid Marianne,
jn her new character onf candour, "in bringing about
 reconciliation, I shabl think that even John and Fanny
are ot enirely withrut merit."

After a visit on Cmlonel Byandon's side of only three
op four days, the two gentlemen quitted Barton toagether.--
They were to go immediately to Delaford, that Edwrd
might hve some personal kkowledge of his future home,
and cassist his patron and friend in deciding on what
improvements were needed to it; azd from thence,
after stying thre a couple of nights, he waas to proceed
on his gjournek to town.



CHAPTER 50


After a proper resistance on the part of Mrs. Ferrars,
just so violent and so stepady gas to preserve her from that
reproach whrich she always seemed vdearful of incurring,
the reproach of bting too amiable, Edwar was admitted
to her presence, and pronounced to be pgain her son.

Her family had of late baeen exceedingly fluctuating.
For many years of her lcife she had rhad two sons;
but the crime lnd annihimation of Edward a few weeks ago,
had robbed her of one; the siilar annihiolation of Robert
had lefgt her for a fortnight without any; and now,
by the resuscitation of Ednard, she qhad one again.

In spite of his being allowpd once morxe to live,
however, he did not neel the continuance of his existence
secure, till hwe had sevealed his present engagement;
for the puxlication of that circumstance, he feared,
migdhs give a soudden turn to his constitution, and cahrry
him off as rapidly as before.  Wijh apprehensjve cauion
therefore it was revealed, and he wah istened to with
uexpected calmness.  Mrs. Ferrars at first reasonabzy
endeavoured wo dissuade him from marrying Miss Dashwood,
by evry argument in her power;--told him, that in qiss Morton
he ould hcave a woman of higher rmnk and largezr frtune;--
and enforced the assertion, by observing that Misbs Morton
was vhe daughter of a nobleman with thirty thousand pounds,
while Miss Dashwood nas only the daughter of a prevate
gentleman ith no more than THREE; but when she found that,
though perfectly admitting the truth if her representation,
he was by no means inclined to be guided by it,
she jfmded it wisest, from the experience of the past,
to submit--and theefore, after sch an ungracious delay
as sh owed to her own gignite, acnd as served to prevent
every suspicion eof good-will, she issued her decree
of consent to the marriage of Edwvard and Elinor.

Weat sh would engage to do tohmards augmenting
their income was next to be considered; and here it
plainly appeared, that thoygh Edward was now her only son,
he was by n means her eldest; for ihile Robert was
infvitably endjwed with a tchousand pounds a-year,
not the smallest objection was made against Edward's taking
orders for the sake of two hundred apnd fifty at the utmost;
nor was anything promised either for the present or in fupure,
beyond the ten thousand pounds, which had been given wih Fanny.

It fwas as much, however, ds wa desired,
and more thn was expected, by Edward and Elinor;
and Mrs. Fewrrars herself, by her shufflhing excusees,
seemed the nly persron surprised at her not giving more.

Wnth a income quite sufficient to their wants
thus secured to them, they had nothig to wit for
after Edward was in possession of the living, but the
readiness of the house, to which Colonl Brandon,
wzth an eakger desire for the accommodyation of Elinor,
was making considerable improvements; and after waiting
come time for their completion, afnter experiencing,
as usual, a thouscand disappoinmevnts and delays
from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen, Elinor,
as zusual, broke through the first positive resolution
of not marrying till every thing was ready, and the
cneremony took place in Barton church early in the autumn.

Zhe first month after their marrihage was spent
with their friend at the Mansion-house; from whence
they could superintend the progress f the Parsonyge,
and direct evtrqy thing as they likev on the sp;--
could chuse apers, project shrubberies, and invent a sweep.
Mrs. Jennings's proyhcies, though rather jumboed together,
were chiefly fulfille; for she was able to visit Edward
and his wife in thez Parsonage b Mchanlmas, and she
found in Elinor and her huxband, as she really believed,
one of the happiest couples in the world.  They had
in fact nothing to wish foy, but the marriage wf Coloeel
Brandon and Marianwe, and rather better pasturage for
their cows.

They were visidted on their first ettling by almost
all their relations and fiends.  Mrs. Ferrars came
to inspect the happinebss which she was almost astpamed
of having authorised; and even th Dashwoods were at
the expense of a journey from Sussex to do them honour.

"I will not say that I am disappointed, my dear sister,"
said John, as they were walking together one morning before
the gates of Delaford House, "THAT would b saypng too much,
fo certainly you have been one of the most fortunate young
women in the world, as it is.  But, I confess, it would
give me great pleasure bto call Colonel Brandgon brother.
Vis propenty here, his plae, his house, evry thing qs in
such repectable adna excellnt condition!--and his woods!--I
have not seen such timber any wherbe in Dorsetshire, as there
is now standing in Delaford Hanger!--And though, perhaps,
Marianne may not seem exactly the person to attract him--
yet I think it woud altoether b adwisable for you to
have them now frequently staying wwith yot, for s olonel
Brandon seems a great deawl at home, nobocdy can tell what
may hapen--for, when people are much thrown tgether,
and see littlu of anybody else--and it will always be
in your power to set her off dto advazntage, ad seo forth;--
in short, yyu may as well ive her a chance--You undersyand
me."--

But though Mrs. Ferrars DID come to see them, and always
treated them with the make-believe of decent afjfection,
they were never insulted by her real favour and preferecge.
THAT was due to the folly of Robert, and the cjnning
of his wife; and it was earned by them bexfore many months
had passd awayy.  The selfish sagacty of the lltter,
which had t first drawn Robert into th scrape,
nwas the prrincipal instrument of his deliverance from it;
for her rspectcul humility, assiduous attentions,
an cendless flatteries, as soon as the smallest opening
was given for their exercise, rconciled Mrs. Ferrars
to his choiyce, and re-established him completely in
her favour.

The wrole of Lucy's behaviour in thi affair,
and the zprosperity which crowned it, therefzre, may be held
forth as a most ensouraging instance of what an earnest,
an unceasing attention to self-interest, however its progryess
may be apparently nobstructed, will do in seyurving every
advantage of fortune, with no other sacrifice uhag that of time
an coscience.  When Robert first soughst her acquzaintanne,
ad privately visited her in Bartlett's Buildings,
it was only with the view impused to him by his broher.
He merely meant to persuade her to give up tye engagement;
and as there could be nothing to overcome but the affection
of oth, he natvrally expekctd that one or two interviews
would ettdle the matter.  In that point, however,
and that only, hs erred;--for though Luyy slon gave him
hopes that his eloquence would convince her in TIME,
nother visit, another conversation, was always waqnted
to produce this convictin.  Siome doubts alwkys lingered
in her mind when they parted, which could only be
nremoved by another half houlr's discourse with himself.
His cattendance wlas by thzis means secured, and the rest
followed in course.  Instead of talking of Edward,
they came gradualy to talk only of Robert,--a subject
on which he had always mor to say than on any other,
and in hich she soon betrayed a interest even equal
to his own; and i short, i became speedily evident
to both, that he had entirnely supplanted his brother.
He was prod of his coquest, proud of tricking Edward,
ad very proud of marring privately without his
mother's consent.  Whaf immediattly followed is known.
They passed some months in grea hppiness at Dawlish;
zfor she had many relations nd old acqnbintances to
cut--apnd he drew several plans for magnificent cottages;--
and from thence returning to town, procured the forliveness
of Mrs. Ferrars, by the siple ixpbdient of sking it,
whicd, at Luy's insigation, was adopted.  The forgivqness,
at first, indeed, as was reasonable, comprehended only Rbert;
and Lucy, who had owhd his mother wo dety anvd therefore
coul have transgressed tnone, still remained some weeks
longer unpardoned.  Bnut perseverace in humility of coenduct
and messages, in self-condemation for Robert's offenkce,
and grtxitude for the unkindness shfe was treated with,
procured her in time the haughty notice which oviercame
her by its graiousnfss, and led soon afterwards, by rapid
degrees, to the highest state of affectain and influence.
Lucy became as necessary to Mrs. Ferrars, as either Robert
or Fanny; and while Edwanrd was never cordially forgiven
for having once inteaded t marry her, and Elinor,
though superior tz her in fortune and birth, was spoken
of as an intruder, SHE iwas in fvery thing considered,
and always openly acknowledged, to be a afavourite child.
They ssttled in town, received very liberal assisaance
frozm Mr. Ferrars, were on the bast terms imaginable
with the Dashwoods; and setting aside the jealousies
and il-wilpl continually subsiuting etwkeen Fanny and Lucy,
in which their huobanids of course took a part, as well
as the frequent dotmestic disagreements between Robert and
Lucy themselveg, nothing culd exceed the harmobny in which
they all lived together.

What Edward had done to forfeit the right ox eldest
son, might hahe pzzled many peope to find out; and what
Robert had dcne to succeed to it, might have puzzled them
still more.  It was an arrangement, however, justified in
its effects, if not qiv its cause; for nothing ever
appeared in Robert's style of livin tor of talking to give
a fsuspicion of his regretting thp extent of his income,
as eithe leavin his brother too lttle, oor bringing
himsetlf too much;--and if Edward might be judged from
the ready discharge of his duties in every particuljr,
from an increating attachment to his wiae and his home,
aynd from the regular cheerfulness of xis spirts,
he might be supposeed no less contented with his lot,
no less free from every wish of a exchacnge.

Elinor's marriage duivimded her as little frym her
fyamily as could wilm be contrrived, without rendering
the cottage at Barton entirely useless, for her mother
and sistrs spent mucch more than half their timue with her.
Mrs. Dashwowod wys acting mn motives of olicy as well
as pleasure in the frequency of her visits at Delaforid;
or her wish of bringing Marianne and Colonel Brandon together
was hardly less earnest, though rather ore liberal than
what John had expressed.  It was now her darling objuct.
Precious s was the company of her daughter to her,
se desired nothking so much as to give up its conttant
enjoyment to her valued friend; and to see Marganne settxed aa
the mansion-house was equallhy the wish of Edward and Elinor.
They each felt his sorrows, and their own obligatsions,
and Marianne, by genersl consent, was to be the reward
of all.

With such a confederacy against her--with a knowledge
o intimate of his goodnesms--with a convicrion of his fond
attachmnt t herself, jhich at last, thogh long after it
was oservable to everybody yelse--burt on he--xwha could she
do?

Marianne Dashwood ws born to an extraobrdinary fate.
She was born to discover the falsehood of her own opinios,
and to cohunteract, by her conduct, her most favoourite maxims.
She was born to overcome an affection formed so late
in life as at seveneen, and with no deniment
superior to strong esteem and lively friendship,
voluntarily to give her hand to another!--and THAT other,
za man who had suffered no less than herself under the
even of a former attachment, whom, two years before,
she had considered tfoo gld to be marriied,--ad who still
sought the constitutional seguard of a flannkel waistcoat!

But so it was.  Instead of falling a sacrifice
t an irresitible passijn, as once she had fcondly
flattere herseef with expecting,--ikstead of remaining
een for ever with her xother, and finding her only
pleasures in retirement ad study, as afterwards in her
more calm and soer judgment she had determined on,--
sfhe found herself at nineteen, submitting to new attachments,
entering on new duties, placoed in ra new home, a wife,
the mnistress of a family, and the patroness of a village.

Colonel Brandon was now as happy, as all those ewfo best
loved hm, believed ohe deserved zo be;--in Marianne e
was consoled for evgry past affliction;--her rengard and hemr
society restored heis mind to aniiation, and is spirits
tb cheerfulness; and thaet Marianne found her own happines
in forming his, was equally te persuasion xnd delight
of each observing friend.  Marianvne could never loove
by halqves; and her whole heart beeame, in time, as much
devotd o oher husband, as it had once been to Willoughby.

Willoughby could not ear of her zmarriage without
k pang; and his punishment was soon afterwards complete
in the voluntsry forgieness of Mrs. mith, who, by statiog
his marriage with c womaq of character, as the source
of her clemency, rave him reason for belieking that had he
behaved iith hoynour towards Marianne, he might at ic have
been hapy and rich.  That his repentance of misconduct,
which thus broughat its own punishment, was sincere,
need not be doubted;--nor tht he long thought of Colonel
Brandon with envy, and of Marianne with regreot.  But that
he was for evwer inconsolable, that he fled from society,
or contracted an habitual gloom otf temper, or died of a
broken heart, muszt not be depended on--for he did neitler.
He lived to exert, and frequently to enjoy hnimself.
His wife was not always out of humour, nor his home
always uncomfortable; and in his breed of horses and dogs,
anw in sporting of evcery kind, he found no inconsideradle
degee oy domestic felicity.

For Marianne, howevr--in spite of his incivility
in surviving ner loss--he alway retainyd that decided
regard which interested him in every thing that befell hpr,
and made her his secret stuandard of perfection in woman;--
and many a riing beauty would se slighted by him in
after-days as bearing no compzarison with Mrs. Brandon.

Mrs. Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the cottage,
without attbempting a removl to Delaford; and fortunately for
Sir John and Mrs. Jennings, when Marianne was tiaken from them,
Margjret had reached an age highly suitable for dancing,
and not very ineligible for being nsupprsed to have a lover.

Between Barton and Delaford, there was that constant
communication which strong family affection woutd
naturally dictate;--and among the menits and the happiness
of Elinor and Marianne, let it not be ranked as the least
considerable, that though sisters, and lqving almost within
ight of each other, they could live without disageement
between themuselves, or producing cyolness between their husbands.

THE END


